
 
The avant-garde masterpiece A Man With a Movie Camera completed by Russian 
director Dziga Vertov in 1929 will serve as our guide to the language of new 
media.This prologue consists of a number of stills from the film. Each still is 
accompanied by quote from the text summarizing a particular principle of new 
media. The number in brackets indicates a page from which the quote is taken. 
The prologue thus acts as a visual index to some of the book's ideas. 

 


VII

1. 
[figure 1] 
  
A hundred years after cinema's birth, cinematic ways of seeing the world, of 
structuring time, of narrating a story, of linking one experience to the next, are 
being extended to become the basic ways in which computer users access and 
interact with all cultural data. In this way, the computer fulfills the promise of 
cinema as a visual Esperanto which pre-occupied many film artists and critics in 
the 1920s, from Griffith to Vertov. Indeed, millions of computer users 
communicate with each other through the same computer interface. And, in 
contrast to cinema where most of its &lsquo;users&rsquo; were able to &lsquo;understand&rsquo; cinematic 
language but not &lsquo;speak&rsquo; it (i.e., make films), all computer users can &lsquo;speak&rsquo; the 
language of the interface. They are active users of the interface, employing it to 
perform many tasks: send email, organize their files, run various applications, and 
so on.&rdquo; 

 


2. 

The incorporation of virtual camera controls into the very hardware of a 
game consoles is truly a historical event. Directing the virtual camera becomes as 
important as controlling the hero's actions&hellip; the computer games are returning to 
"The New Vision" movement of the 1920s (Moholy-Nagy, Rodchenko, Vertov 
and others), which foregrounded new mobility of a photo and film camera, and 
made unconventional points of view the key part of their poetics. 

 



IX

3. 
[figure 6] [figure 7] [figure 8] [figure 9] 
 
(140) &ldquo;Editing, or montage, is the key twentieth technology for creating fake 
realities. Theoreticians of cinema have distinguished between many kinds of 
montage but, for the purposes of sketching the archeology of the technologies of 
simulation leading to digital compositing, I will distinguish between two basic 
techniques. The first technique is temporal montage: separate realities form 
consecutive moments in time. The second technique is montage within a shot. It is 
the opposite of the first: separate realities form contingent parts of a single 
image&hellip; examples [of montage within a shot] include the superimposition of a 
few images and multiple screens used by the avant-garde filmmakers in the 
1920&rsquo;s (for instance, superimposed images in Vertov&rsquo;s Man with a Movie Camera 
and a three-part screen in Gance Abel&rsquo;s 1927 Napol&eacute;on). 

 

&#xC; 

X

4. 
[figure 10]  [figure 11] [figure 12] 
 
(140) &ldquo;As theorized by Vertov, through [temporal] montage, film can overcome 
its indexical nature, presenting a viewer with objects which never existed in 
reality.&rdquo; 

 

&#xC; 

XI

5. 
[figure 13] [figure 14] 
  
(147) &ldquo;While the dominant use of digital compositing is to create a seamless 
virtual space, it does not have to be subordinated to this goal. The borders 
between different worlds do not have to be erased; the different spaces do not 
have to be matched in perspective, scale and lighting; the individual layers can 
retain their separate identity rather then being merged into a single space; the 
different worlds can clash semantically rather than form a single universe.&rdquo; 

 

&#xC; 
XII

6. 
[figure 15] [figure 16] [figure 17] [figure 18] [figure 19] 
 
(158) &ldquo;The cameraman, whom Benjamin compares to a surgeon, &lsquo;penetrates 
deeply into its [reality] web&rsquo;; his camera zooms in order to &lsquo;pray an object from 
its shell.&rsquo; With its new mobility, glorified in such films as A Man with the Movie 
Camera, the camera can be anywhere, and, with its superhuman vision, it can 
obtain a close-up of any object... Along with disregarding the scale, the unique 
locations of the objects are discarded as well as their photographs brought 
together within a single picture magazine or a film newsreel, the forms which fit 
in with the demand of mass democratic society for &lsquo;the universal equality of 
things.&rsquo;&rdquo; 

 

&#xC; 
XIII

7. 
[figure 20] [figure 21] 
 
(160) &ldquo;Modernization is accompanied by the process of disruption of physical 
space and matter, the process which privileges interchangeable and mobile signs 
over the original objects and relations&hellip;The concept of modernization fits equally 
well Benjamin's account of film and Virilio's account of telecommunication, the 
latter just being a more advanced stage in this continual process of turning objects 
into mobile signs. Before, different physical locations met within a single 
magazine spread or a film newsreel; now, they meet within a single electronic 
screen.&rdquo; 

 

&#xC; 
XIV

8. 
[figure 22] [figure 23] 
 
(183) &ldquo;Whose vision is it? It is the vision of a computer, a cyborg, a automatic 
missile. It is a realistic representation of human vision in the future when it will be 
augmented by computer graphics and cleansed from noise. It is the vision of a 
digital grid. Synthetic computer-generated image is not an inferior representation 
of our reality, but a realistic representation of a different reality.&rdquo;

 

&#xC; 
XV

9. 
[figure 24] 
 
(209) &ldquo;Along with Greenaway, Dziga Vertov can be thought of as a major 
&lsquo;database filmmaker&rsquo; of the twentieth century. Man with a Movie Camera is 
perhaps the most important example of database imagination in modern media 
art.&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC; 
XVI

10. 
[figure 25] [figure 26] [figure 27] 
 
(210) &ldquo;Just as new media objects contain a hierarchy of levels (interface &mdash; 
content; operating system &mdash; application; Web page &mdash; HTML code; high-level 
programming language &mdash; assembly language &mdash; machine language), Vertov's 
film consists of at least three levels. One level is the story of a cameraman filming 
material for the film. The second level is the shots of an audience watching the 
finished film in a movie theater. The third level is this film, which consists from 
footage recorded in Moscow, Kiev and Riga and is arranged according to a 
progression of one day:  waking up &mdash; work &mdash; leisure activities. If this third level 
is a text, the other two can be thought of as its meta-texts.&rdquo;  

 

&#xC;XVII

 

11. 
[figure 28] [figure 29] [figure 30] [figure 31] [figure 32] [figure 33] [figure 34] 
 
(211) &rdquo;If a &lsquo;normal&rsquo; avant-garde film still proposes a coherent language different 
from the language of mainstream  cinema, i.e. a small set of techniques which are 
repeated, Man with a Movie Camera never arrives at anything like a well-defined 
language. Rather, it proposes an untamed, and apparently endless unwinding of 
cinematic techniques, or, to use contemporary language, &lsquo;effects&rsquo;, as cinema's 
new way of speaking.&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC;XVIII

 

12. 
[figure 35] [figure 36] 
 
(212) &rdquo;And this is why Vertov&rsquo;s film has a particular relevance to new media. It 
proves that it is possible to turn &ldquo;effects&rdquo; into a meaningful artistic language. Why 
in the case of Witney's computer films and music videos the effects are just 
effects, while in the hands of Vertov they acquire meaning? Because in Vertov's 
film they are motivated by a particular argument, this being that the new 
techniques to obtain images and manipulate them, summed up by Vertov in his 
term "kino-eye," can be used to decode the world. As the film progresses, 
"straight" footage gives way to manipulated footage; newer techniques appear one 
after one, reaching a roller coaster intensity by the film's end, a true orgy of 
cinematography. It is as though Vertov re-stages his discovery of the kino-eye for 
us. Along with Vertov, we gradually realize the full range of possibilities offered 
by the camera. Vertov's goal is to seduce us into his way of seeing and thinking, 
to make us share his excitement, his gradual process of discovery of film's new 
language. This process of discovery is film's main narrative and it is told through 
a catalog of discoveries being made. Thus, in the hands of Vertov, a database, this 
normally static and "objective" form, becomes dynamic and subjective. More 
importantly, Vertov is able to achieve something which new media designers and 
artists still have to learn &mdash; how to merge database and narrative merge into a new 
form.&rdquo; 
 

 

&#xC; 
XIX

13. 
[figure 37] [figure 38] [figure 39] 
 
(226) &ldquo;If modern visual culture exemplified by MTV can be thought of as a 
Mannerist stage of cinema, its perfected techniques of cinematography, mise-en-
scene and editing self-consciously displayed and paraded for its own sake, 
Waliczky's film presents an alternative response to cinema&rsquo;s classical age, which 
is now behind us. In this meta-film, the camera, part of cinema&rsquo;s apparatus, 
becomes the main character (in this we may connect The Forest  to another meta-
film, A Man with a Movie Camera).&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC; 
XX

14. 
[figure 40] [figure 41] [figure 42] [figure 43] 
 
(236) &ldquo;Vertov stands half-way between Baudelaire's fl&acirc;neur and computer user: 
no longer just a pedestrian walking through a street, but not yet Gibson&rsquo;s data 
cowboy who zooms through pure data armed with data mining algorithms. In his 
research on what can be called &ldquo;kino-eye interface,&rdquo; Vertov systematically tried 
different ways to overcome what he thought were the limits of human vision. He 
mounted cameras on the roof of a building and a moving automobile; he slowed 
and speed up film speed; he superimposed a number of images together in time 
and space (temporal montage and montage within a shot). A Man with a Movie 
Camera is not only a database of city life in the 1920s, a database of film 
techniques, and a database of new operations of visual epistemology, but it is also 
a database of new interface operations which together aim to go beyond a simple 
human navigation through a physical space.&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC; 
XXI

15. 
[figure 44] [figure 45] 
 
(258)  &ldquo;Avant-garde aesthetic strategies became embedded in the commands and 
interface metaphors of computer software. The avant-garde became materialized 
in a computer. Digital cinema technology is a case in point. The avant-garde 
strategy of collage reemerged as a "cut and paste" command, the most basic 
operation one can perform on digital data. The idea of painting on film became 
embedded in paint functions of film editing software. The avant-garde move to 
combine animation, printed texts and live action footage is repeated in the 
convergence of animation, title generation, paint, compositing and editing systems 
into single all-in-one packages.&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC;XXII

 

16. 
[figure 46] [figure 47] 
 
(265) &ldquo;Cinema's birth from a loop form was reenacted at least once during its 
history. In one of the sequences of  A Man with a Movie Camera, Vertov shows 
us a cameraman standing in the back of a moving automobile. As he is being 
carried forward by an automobile, he cranks the handle of his camera. A loop, a 
repetition, created by the circular movement of the handle, gives birth to a 
progression of events -- a very basic narrative which is also quintessentially 
modern: a camera moving through space recording whatever is in its way.&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC;XXIII

 

17. 
[figure 48] 
 
(266) &ldquo;Can the loop be a new narrative form appropriate for the computer age? It 
is relevant to recall that the loop gave birth not only to cinema but also to 
computer programming. Programming involves altering the linear flow of data 
through control structures, such as &lsquo;if/then&rsquo; and &lsquo;repeat/while&rsquo;; the loop is the 
most elementary of these control structures&hellip;. As the practice of computer 
programming illustrates, the loop and the sequential progression do not have to be 
thought as being mutually exclusive. A computer program progresses from start to 
end end by executing a series of loops.&rdquo;  

 

&#xC;XXIV

 

18. 
[figure 49] [figure 50] [figure 51] 
 
(270) &ldquo;Spatial montage represents an alternative to traditional cinematic temporal 
montage, replacing its traditional sequential mode with a spatial one. Ford's 
assembly line relied on the separation of the production process into a set of 
repetitive, sequential, and simple activities. The same principle made computer 
programming possible: a computer program breaks a tasks into a series of 
elemental operations to be executed one at a time. Cinema followed this logic of 
industrial production as well. It replaced all other modes of narration with a 
sequential narrative, an assembly line of shots which appear on the screen one at a 
time. A sequential narrative turned out to be particularly incompatible with a 
spatial narrative which played a prominent role in European visual culture for 
centuries.&rdquo; 

 

&#xC;XXV

 

19.  
[figure 52] 
 
(271) &ldquo;Since the Xerox Park Alto workstation, GUI used multiple windows. It 
would be logical to expect that cultural forms based on moving images will 
eventually adopt similar conventions&hellip; We may expect that computer-based 
cinema will eventually have to follow the same direction &mdash; especially when the 
limitations of communication bandwidth will disappear, while the resolution of 
displays will significantly increase, from the typical 1-2K in 2000 to 4K, 8K or 
beyond. I believe that the next generation of cinema &mdash; broadband cinema &mdash; will 
add multiple windows to its language.&rdquo; 
  

 

&#xC;XXVI

 

20. 
[figure 53] 
[figure 54] 
[figure 55] 
 
(273)  &ldquo;If HCI is an interface to computer data, and a book is interface to text, 
cinema can be thought of an interface to events taking place in 3D space. Just as 
painting before it, cinema presented us with familiar images of visible reality &mdash; 
interiors, landscapes, human characters &mdash; arranged within a rectangular frame. 
The aesthetics of these arrangements ranges from extreme scarcity to extreme 
density&hellip; It would be only a small leap to relate this density of &ldquo;pictorial 
displays&rdquo; to the density of contemporary information displays such as Web 
portals which may contain a few dozen hyperlinked elements; or the interfaces of 
popular software packages which similarly present the user with dozens 
commands at once.&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC;XXVII

 

Acknowledgments 

Special thanks: Doug Sery, my editor at MIT whose support and continuos 

For providing inspiring places to work: Mondrian Hotel (West Hollywood, 

This book would not exist without all the friends, colleagues and 

 
 
encouragment made this book possible; Mark Tribe, who read the manuscript in 
its entarity, offered numerous suggestestions and helped me with the last stage of 
manuscript preparation; Rochelle Feinstein, for everything.  
 
institutions committed to new media art and theory. I am grateful to all of them 
for ongoing exchange, and intellectual and emotional support. 
 
Los Angeles), The Standard (West Hollywood, Los Angeles), Fred Segal (West 
Hollywood, Los Angeles), Del Mar Plaza (Del Mar, CA), Gitano (Nolita, NYC), 
Space Untitled (Soho, New York), The Royal Library (Stockholm), De Jaren 
(Amsterdam). 
 
California, San Diego; Department of Cinema Studies, Stockholm University; 
Center for User-centered Interface Design, Royal Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm. 
 
 
 
 

Administrative support: Department of Visual Arts, University of 

Word processor: Microsoft Word.  
Web browser: Netscape Navigator, Internet Explorer. 
Favorite search engine: www.hotbot.com 
Favorite moving image format: QuickTime 
HTML editor: Netscape Communicator, Macromedia Dreamweather. 
OS: Windows 98. 
Hardware: SONY PCG505FX laptop. 
Mobile phone: Nokia. 
The principal editing of his book was done between July 1998 and 

 
 
 
 
November 1999 in La Jolla and Del Mar, California; Los Angeles; New York; 
Stockholm, Helsinki, and Amsterdam. 
 

While significant parts of this book have been written anew, it have drawn 

on material from a number of previously published articles. Sometimes only a 
part of an article made it into the final manuscript; in other cases, its parts ended 
up in different chapters of the book; in yet other case, a whole article became the 
basis for one of the sections. In the following I list the articles which were used as 
material for the book. Many of them were reprinted and translated into other 
languages; here I list the first instance of publication in English. Also, it has been 
and 
my practice for a number of years to post any new writing I do to Nettime 
2
Rhizome
, the two important Internet email lists devoted to discussions of new 
media art, criticism and politics. This helped me to receive immediate feedback 
on my work and also provided me with a sense of community interested in my 

1

 

&#xC;XXVIII

 

"Cinema and Digital Media." In Perspektiven der Medienkunst / 

"Assembling Reality: Myths of Computer Graphics." In Afterimage 20, 

"Reading Media Art." (In German translation) in Mediagramm 20 (ZKM / 

"Archeology of a Computer Screen." In NewMediaLogia (Moscow: Soros 

"Distance and Aura." In _SPEED_: Technology, Media, Society 1.4 

work. Therefore, most of the articles appeared on these two email lists before 
being published in more traditional print venues such as journals and anthologies 
or in Internet journals.  
 
 
no. 2 (September 1992): 12-14.  
 
"Paradoxes of Digital Photography." In Photography After Photography, 
edited by v. Amelunxen, Stefan Iglhaut, Florian R&ouml;tzer, 58-66 (M&uuml;nhen: Verlag 
der Kunst, 1995). 
 
"To Lie and to Act: Potemkin's Villages, Cinema and Telepresence." In 
Mythos Information -- Welcome to the Wired World. Ars Electronica 95, edited 
by Karl Gebel and Peter Weibel, 343-353 (Vienna and New York: Springler-
Verlag, 1995). 
 
Zentrum f&uuml;r Kunst und Medientechnologie Karlsruhe, 1995): 4-5. 
 
Center for the Contemporary Art, 1996). 
 
(http://www.arts.ucsb.edu/~speed/1.4/), 1996. 
 
Perspectives of Media Art, edited by Jeffrey Shaw and Hans Peter Schwarz 
(Cantz Verlag Ostfildern, 1996.) 
 
Heinz Heise, 1996). 
 
Telepolis  (www.ix.de/tp) (Munich: Verlag Heinz Heise, 1996). 
 
1996. 
 
October 1997): 40-43. 
 
(http://gsa.rutgers.edu/maldoror/techne/w3lab-entry.html), 1998. 
 
1998. 
 
ONSCREEN/OFFSCREEN - Grenzen, &Uuml;berg&auml;nge und Wandel des filmischen 
Raumes, eds. Hans Beller, Martin Emele u. Michael Schuster (Cantz Verlag 
Stuttgart, 1999). 
 
Contemporary ASCII (Ljubljana, Slovenija: forthcoming). 
(http://www.vuk.org/ascii/)  
 

"On Totalitarian Interactivity." In RHIZOME (http://www.rhizome.com), 

"New Media: a User's Guide" in NET.CONDITION (ZKM / Zentrum f&uuml;r 

"Database as a Symbolic Form." In RHIZOME (www.rhizome.com), 

"What is Digital Cinema?" In Telepolis  (www.ix.de/tp) (Munich: Verlag 

"The Aesthetics of Virtual Worlds: Report from Los Angeles." In 

"Behind the Screen / Russian New Media." In art / text  58 (August - 

"Cinema as a Cultural Interface." In W3LAB 

&#x93;&ldquo;Navigable Space.&#x94;&rdquo; (In German translation) in 

"Cinema by Numbers: ASCII Films by Vuk Cosic." In Vuk Cosic: 

 

&#xC;XXIX

 

Kunst und Medientechnologie Karlsruhe and The MIT Press, forthcoming). 
 
 

 

&#xC; 

30

 

Introduction 

 

The same year, 1975, I start taking private lessons in classical drawing, 

 
A Personal Chronology  
 
Moscow, 1975. Although my ambition is to become a painter, I enroll in the so-
called &#x93;&ldquo;mathematical&#x94;&rdquo; (&#x93;&ldquo;matematicheskaya&#x94;&rdquo;) high school which in addition to a 
regular curriculum has courses in calculus and computer programming. The 
programming course lasts two years during which we never see a computer. Our 
teacher uses a black board to explain the concepts of computer programming. 
First we learn a computer language invented in Soviet Union in the late 1950s. 
The language has a wonderful Cold War name: Peace-1 (Mir-1.) Later we learn a 
more standard high-level language: ALGOL-60. For two years, we write 
computer programs in our notebooks. Our teaches grades them and returns them 
back with corrections: missed end of the loop statement; undeclared variable; 
forgotten semi-colon. At the end of the two-year course we are taken&#x97;&mdash;just 
once&#x97;&mdash;to a data processing center, which normally requires clearance to enter. I 
enter my program into a computer but it does not run: since I never saw a 
computer keyboard before, I use capital O whenever I need to input zero.  
 
which also last two years. Moscow Architectural Institute entrance exams include 
a test in which the applicants have to complete a drawing of an antique cast in 
eight hours. To get the top grade one has to produce a drawing which not only 
looks like the cast and has perfect perspective but also has perfect shading. Which 
means that all shadows and surfaces are defined completely through shading, so 
all lines originally used to define them disappear. Hundreds of hours spent in front 
of a drawing board pay off: I get an A on the exam, even though out of eight 
possible casts I get the most difficult one: Venera. It is more difficult because, in 
contrast to casts of male heads such as Socrates, it does not have well-defined 
facets; the surfaces join smoothly together as though constructed using a spline 
modeling program. (Later I learn that, during the 1970s, computer scientists were 
working on the same problem: how to produce smoothly shaded images of 3D 
objects in a computer. The standard rendering algorithm still used today was 
invented at the University of Utah in 1975&mdash;the same year I started my drawing 
lessons.
 
Tetronics terminal in Midtown Manhattan. I have just finished my night shift at 
Digital Effects, one of the first companies in the world devoted to producing 3D 
computer animation for film and television. The company worked on Tron and 
produced computer animation for all of the major television networks; my job was 

 
New York, 1985. It is early morning and I am sitting in front of a 

3

 

&#xC; 

31

Linz, Austria, 1995. I am at Ars Electronica, the world&rsquo;s most prestigious 

to operate the Harris-500 mainframe, used to compute animations, and also the 
PDP-11, which controlled Dicomed film recorder, used to output animation on 
35mm film. After a few months I am able to figure out company&rsquo;s proprietary 
computer graphics software written in APL, and am now working on my first 
images. I would like to produce a synthetic image of an antique cast, but it turns 
out to be impossible. The software is only able to create 3D objects out of 
primitive geometric forms such as cubes, cylinders and spheres; a decade would 
have to pass before one could go on the Internet and download tens of thousands 
of ready-made 3D models of all kinds of objects . So I settle for a composition 
made out of these primitive forms. Tetronics is a vector rather than raster 
terminal, which means that it does not update its screen in real time. Each time I 
make a change in my program or simply change a point of view, I hit the enter 
key and wait while the computer redraws the lines, one by one. I wonder why I 
had to spend years learning to draw images in perspective when a computer could 
do it in seconds. A few of the images I create are exhibited in shows of computer 
art in New York. But this is heyday of post-modernism, the art market is hot, 
paintings by young New York artists are selling for hundreds of thousands of 
dollars, and the art world has little interest in computer animation or even 
computer art.    
 
annual computer art festival. This year it drops the &ldquo;Computer Graphics&rdquo; 
category, replacing it with the new &ldquo;net art&rdquo; category, signaling a new stage in the 
evolution of modern culture and media. The computer, which since the early 60s 
was used as a production tool, has become a universal media machine: a tool used 
not only for production, but also for storage, distribution and playback. The 
World Wide Web crystallized this new condition; on the level of language, it was 
recognized already around 1990 when the term &ldquo;digital media&rdquo; came to be used 
along with &ldquo;computer graphics.&rdquo; At the same time, along with existing cultural 
forms, during the 1990s computers came to host an array of new forms: Web sites 
and computer games, hypermedia CD-ROMs and interactive installations&mdash;in 
short, &ldquo;new media.&rdquo; And if in 1985 I had to write a long computer program in a 
specialized computer language just to put a picture of a shaded cube on a 
computer screen, ten years later I can choose from a number of inexpensive, 
menu-based 3D software tools which run on ordinary PCs and which come with 
numerous ready-made 3D models, including detailed human figures and heads. 
 
What else can be said about 1995? The Soviet Union, where I was born, 
no longer exists. With its demise, the tensions which animated creative 
imaginations both in the East and the West&mdash;between freedom and confinement, 
between interactivity and predetermination, between consumerism in the West 
and something which thinkers and artists in the East called &ldquo;spirituality&rdquo;&mdash; had 
disappeared. What came in their place? A triumph of consumerism, commercial 
culture (based on stereotypes and limited clich&eacute;s), mega-corporations which laid 
claims on such basic categories as space, time and the future (&ldquo;Where do You 

 

&#xC; 

32

Want to Go Today?&rdquo; ads by Microsoft; Internet Time by Swatch which breaks 24 
hours into 1,000 Swatch &lsquo;beats&rsquo;; &ldquo;You will&rdquo; ads by AT&T), and something which 
thinkers and artists call &ldquo;globalization&rdquo; (a term at least as elusive as 
&ldquo;spirituality&rdquo;). 

When I visited St. Petersburg in 1995 to participate in small computer art 
festival called &ldquo;In Search of Third Reality,&rdquo; I saw a curious performance, which 
may be a good parable of globalization. Like the rest of the festival, the 
performance took place in the Planetarium. The Director of the Planetarium, 
forced like everybody else to make his own living in the new Russian economic 
order (or lack thereof), rented the Planetarium to conference organizers. Under the 
black semi-spherical ceiling with mandatory models of planets and stars, a young 
artist was methodically painting an abstract painting. Probably trained in the same 
classical style as I was earlier, he was no Pollock; cautiously and systematically, 
he made careful brushstrokes on the canvas in front of him. On his hand he wore a 
Nintendo Dataglove, which in 1995 was a common media object in the West but a 
rare sight in St. Petersburg. The Dataglove was transmitting the movements of his 
hand to a small electronic synthesizer, assembled in the laboratory of some 
Moscow institute. The music coming out of the synthesizer served as an 
accompaniment to two dancers, a male and a female. Dressed in Isidora Dunkan 
like clothing, they improvised a &ldquo;modern dance&rdquo; in front of the older and, 
apparently, completely puzzled audience. Classical art, abstraction and a Nintendo 
Dataglove; electronic music and early twentieth century modernism; discussions 
of virtual reality (VR) in a Planetarium located in this classical city which, like 
Venice, is obsessed with its past&mdash;what for me, coming from the West, were 
incompatible historical and conceptual layers were here composited together, with 
the Nintendo Dataglove being just one layer in this mix.     

What had also come by 1995 was Internet&mdash;the most material and visible 
sign of globalization. And, by the end of the decade, it has also become clear that 
the gradual computerization of culture will eventually transform all of it. So, to 
invoke the old Marxist model of base and superstructure, if the economic base of 
modern society from the 1950s onward started to shift toward a service and 
information economy, becoming by the 1970s a so-called &ldquo;post-industrial society&rdquo; 
(Daniel Bell), and then later a &ldquo;network society&rdquo; (Manual Castells),  by the 1990s 
 If the &ldquo;post-
the superstructure started to feel the full impact of this change.
modernism&rdquo; of the 1980s was the first, preliminary echo of this shift still to 
come&mdash;still weak, still possible to ignore&mdash;the 1990s&rsquo; rapid transformation of 
culture into e-culture, of computers into universal culture carriers, of media into 
new media, demanded that we rethink our categories and models.        
 
 
 
Theory of the Present 

The year is 2005&hellip; 

4

 

&#xC; 

33

Today we are witnessing the emergence of a new medium&mdash;the meta-

 
I wish that somebody, in 1895, 1897 or at least in 1903, had realized the 
fundamental significance of cinema's emergence and produced a comprehensive 
record of the new medium's emergence: interviews with the audiences; a 
systematic account of the narrative strategies, scenography and camera positions 
as they developed year by year; an analysis of the connections between the 
emerging language of cinema and different forms of popular entertainment which 
coexisted with it. Unfortunately, such records do not exist. Instead, we are left 
with newspaper reports, diaries of cinema's inventors, programs of film showings 
and other bits and pieces&mdash;a set of random and unevenly distributed historical 
samples.  
 
medium of the digital computer. In contrast to a hundred years ago, when cinema 
was coming into being, we are fully aware of the significance of this new media 
revolution. And yet I am afraid that future theorists and historians of computer 
media will be left with not much more than the equivalents of newspaper reports 
and film programs left from cinema's first decades. They will find that the 
analytical texts from our era are fully aware of the significance of computer's 
takeover of culture yet, by and large, mostly contain speculations about the future 
rather than a record and a theory of the present. Future researchers will wonder 
why the theoreticians, who already had plenty of experience analyzing older 
cultural forms, did not try to describe computer media's semiotic codes, modes of 
address, and audience reception patterns. Having painstakingly reconstructed how 
cinema emerged out of preceding  cultural forms (panorama, optical toys, peep 
shows), why didn't they attempt to construct a similar genealogy for the language 
of computer media at the moment when it was just coming into being, while the 
elements of previous cultural forms going into its making were still clearly 
visible, still recognizable before melting into a new unity? Where were the 
theoreticians at the moment when the icons and the buttons of multimedia 
interfaces were like wet paint on a just-completed painting, before they became 
universal conventions and thus slipped into invisibility? Where were they at the 
moment when the designers of Myst were debugging their code, converting 
graphics to 8-bit and massaging QuickTime clips? Or at the historical moment 
when a young 20-something programmer at Netscape took the chewing gum out 
of his mouth, sipped warm Coke out of the can&mdash;he was at a computer for 16 
hours straight, trying to meet a marketing deadline&mdash;and, finally satisfied with its 
small file size, saved a short animation of stars moving across the night sky? This 
animation was to appear in the upper right corner of Netscape Navigator, thus 
becoming the most widely seen moving image sequence ever until the next 
release of the software  
 
The following is an attempt at both a record, and a theory, of the present. 
Just as film historians traced the development of film language during cinema's 
first decades, I aim to describe and understand the logic driving the development 

 

&#xC; 

34

Does it make sense to theorize the present when it seems to be changing so 

of the language of new media. (I am not claiming that there is a single language of 
new media; rather, I use it as an umbrella term to refer to a number of various 
conventions used by designers of new media objects to organize data and 
structure user&rsquo;s experience.) It is tempting to extend this parallel a little further 
and to speculate whether today this new language is already getting closer to 
acquiring its final and stable form, just as film language acquired its "classical" 
form during the 1910's. Or it may be that the 1990's are more like the 1890's, 
because the computer media language of the future will be entirely different from 
the one used today.   
 
fast? It is a hedged bet. If subsequent developments prove my theoretical 
projections correct, I win. But even if the language of computer media develops in 
a different direction than the one suggested by the present analysis  the analysis 
presented here will become a record of possibilities which were heretofore 
unrealized, of a horizon which was visible to us today but later became 
unimaginable. 
 
We no longer think of the history of cinema as a linear march towards a 
single possible language, or as a progression towards perfect verisimilitude. On 
the contrary, we have come to see its history as a succession of distinct and 
equally expressive languages, each with its own aesthetic variables, each new 
language closing off some of the possibilities of the previous one (a cultural logic 
5
not dissimilar to Thomas Kuhn's analysis of scientific paradigms.)
every stage in the history of computer media offers its own aesthetic 
opportunities, as well as its own imagination of the future: in short, its own 
"research paradigm." Each paradigm is modified or even abandoned at the next 
stage. In this book I wanted to record the "research paradigm" of new media 
during its first decade, before it slips into invisibility.  
 
 
Mapping New Media: the Method 
 
In this book I analyze the language of new media by placing it within the history 
of modern visual and media cultures. What are the ways in which new media 
relies on older cultural forms and languages and what are the ways in which it 
breaks with them? What is unique about how new media objects create the 
illusion of reality, address the viewer, and represent space and time? How do 
conventions and techniques of old media&mdash;such as the rectangular frame, mobile 
viewpoint and montage&mdash;operate in new media? If we are to construct an 
archeology which will connect new computer-based techniques of media creation 
with previous techniques of representation and simulation, where should we 
locate the essential historical breaks? 

 Similarly, 

 

&#xC; 

35

To answer these questions, I look at several areas of new media: Web 

, VR, multimedia, computer games, interactive installations, 

6
sites, virtual worlds
computer animation, digital video, cinema, and human-computer interfaces. 
While the book's main emphasis is on theoretical and historical arguments, I also 
analyze many key new media objects created during the field&rsquo;s history, from such 
American commercial classics as Myst and Doom, Jurassic Park and Titanic, to 
the works of international new media artists and collectives such as ART+COM, 
antirom, jodi.org, George Legrady, Olga Lialina, Jeffrey Shaw, and Tamas 
Waliczky.  
 
The computerization of culture not only leads to the emergence of new 
cultural forms such as computer games and virtual worlds; it redefines existing 
ones such as photography and cinema. I therefore also investigate the effects of 
the computer revolution on visual culture at large. How does the shift to 
computer-based media redefine the nature of static and moving images? What is 
the effect of computerization on the visual languages used by our culture? What 
are the new aesthetic possibilities which become available to us? 

In answering these questions, I draw upon the histories of art, 

photography, video, telecommunication, design and, last but not least, the key 
cultural form of the twentieth century&mdash;cinema. The theory and history of cinema 
serve as the key conceptual &ldquo;lens&rdquo; though which  I look at new media. The book 
explores the following topics:  

  

 

&bull; 
&bull; 
&bull; 

&bull; 

the parallels between cinema history and the history of new media; 
the identity of digital cinema; 
the relations between the language of multimedia and nineteenth century pre-
cinematic cultural forms; 
the functions of screen, mobile camera and montage in new media as 
compared to cinema; 
the historical ties between new media and avant-garde film.  

&bull; 
 
Along with film theory, this book draws its theoretical frameworks from both the 
humanities and the sciences, utilizing art history, literary theory, media studies, 
social theory, and computer science. Its overall method could be called "digital 
materialism." Rather than imposing some a priori theory from above, I build a 
theory of new media from the ground up. I scrutinize the principles of computer 
hardware and software, and the operations involved in creating cultural objects on 
a computer, in order to uncover a new cultural logic at work.  

Most writings on new media are full of speculation about the future. This 

book analyses new media as it has actually developed up until this point, at the 
same time pointing to directions for new media artists and designers which have 
not been yet explored. It is my hope that the theory of new media developed here 

 

&#xC; 

36

can act not only as an aid to help understand the present, but also as a grid for 
practical experimentation. For example, &ldquo;Theory of Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; section 
analyzes how the interfaces of new media objects are being shaped by three 
cultural traditions: print, cinema and human-computer interface. By describing the 
elements of these traditions which are already used in new media, this analysis 
points towards other elements and their combinations which are still waiting to be 
experimented with. &ldquo;Compositing&rdquo; section provides another set of directions for 
experiments by outlining a number of new types of montage. Yet another 
direction is discussed in &ldquo;Database&rdquo; were I suggest that new media narratives can 
explore the new compositional and aesthetic possibilities offered by a computer 
database.   

While this book does not speculate about the future, it does contain an 

implicit theory of how new media will develop. This is the advantage of placing 
new media within a larger historical perspective. We begin to see the long 
trajectories which lead to new media in its present state; and we can extrapolate 
these trajectories into the future. The section &ldquo;Principles of New Media&rdquo; describes 
four key trends which, in my view, are shaping the development of new media 
over time: modularity, automation, variability and transcoding. 

Of course we don&rsquo;t have to blindly accept these trends. Understanding the 
logic which is shaping the evolution of new media language allows us to develop 
different alternatives. Just as avant-garde filmmakers throughout cinema's 
existence offered alternatives to its particular narrative audio-visual regime, the 
task of avant-garde new media artists today is to offer alternatives to the existing 
language of computer media. This can be better accomplished if we have a theory 
of how "mainstream" language is structured now and how it is evolving over time.    
 
 
Mapping New Media: Organization  
 
This book aims to contribute to the emerging field of new media studies (other 
names which have been already used to describe it are &ldquo;digital studies&rdquo; and 
&ldquo;digital culture&rdquo;) by providing one potential map of what the field can be. If a 
textbook of literary theory may, for instance, have chapters on narrative and 
voice, and a textbook of film studies may discuss cinematography and editing, 
this book proposes that new media theory requires the definition and refinement 
of separate categories such as interface and operations. 

I&rsquo;ve divided the book into a number of chapters, each chapter covering 

one key concept or problem. My overall argument&mdash;that we should approach new 
media in relation to other visual cultural forms and put it in historical 
perspective&mdash;affects my approach to each problem, but it does not drive the 
overall structure of the book. Instead, concepts developed in earlier chapters 
become building blocks for analyses in later chapters. In ordering the chapters, I 

 

&#xC; 

37

also considered textbooks in other established fields relevant to new media, such 
as film studies, narratology and art history; much as a textbook on film may begin 
with film technology and end up with film genres, this book progresses from the 
material foundations of new media to its forms.   

One could also draw an analogy between the &ldquo;bottom-up&rdquo; approach I use 
here and the organization of computer software. A computer program written by a 
programmer undergoes a series of translations: high-level computer language is 
compiled into executable code, which is then converted by an assembler into 
binary code. In this book I follow this order in reverse, advancing from the level 
of binary code to the level of a computer program, and then moves further to 
consider the logic of new media objects driven by these programs: 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

 
&ldquo;What is New Media&rdquo;: the digital &ldquo;medium&rdquo; itself, its material and logical 
organization. 
&ldquo;The Interface&rdquo;: the human-computer interface; the operating system 
(OS).  
&ldquo;The Operations&rdquo;: software applications which run on top of the OS, their 
interfaces and  typical operations.  
&ldquo;The Illusions&rdquo;: appearance, and the new logic of digital images created 
and accessed using software applications.  
&ldquo;The Forms&rdquo;: the commonly used conventions for organizing a new media 
object as as a whole. 
   

The last chapter &ldquo;What is Cinema?&rdquo; mirrors the book&rsquo;s beginning. Chapter I  
points out that many of its allegedly unique principles can be already found in 
cinema. The subsequent chapters continue this perspective of using film history 
and theory to analyze new media. Having discussed different levels of new media 
&mdash; the interface, the operations, the illusion, and the forms &mdash; in this chapter I turn 
my conceptual &ldquo;lens&rdquo; around to look at how computerization changes cinema 
itself. I first analyze the identity of digital cinema by placing it within a history of 
a moving image and then discuss how computerization offers new opportunities 
for the development of film language.  

At the same time, the last chapter continues &ldquo;bottom-up&rdquo; trajectory of the 
book as a whole. If Chapter V looks at organization of new cultural objects, such 
as Web sites, hypermedia CD-ROMs and virtual worlds, which are all the 
&ldquo;children&rdquo; of a computer, Chapter 6 considers the effects of a computerization on 
a older cultural form which exists, so to speak, &ldquo;outside&rdquo; of computer culture 
proper &mdash; cinema.    

Each chapter begins with a short introduction which discusses its concept 
(or  &ldquo;level&rdquo;) and summarizes the arguments developed in individual sections. For 
example, Chapter II, "The Interface," begins with a general discussion of the 
importance of the concept of the interface in new media. The two sections of 
Chapter II then look at different aspects of new media interfaces: their reliance on 

 

&#xC; 

38

 

  

the conventions of other media and the relationship between the body of the user 
and the interface. 
 
 
The Terms: Language, Object, Representation 
 
In putting the word &#x93;&ldquo;language&#x94;&rdquo; into the title of the book, I did not want to suggest 
that there is some &#x93;&ldquo;single&#x94;&rdquo; language of new media or that we need to return to the 
structuralist phase of semiotics in understanding new media. However, given that 
most studies of new media and cyber culture focus on its sociological, economic 
and political dimensions, I felt justified in using the word &#x93;&ldquo;language&#x94;&rdquo; to signal the 
different focus of  this work: the emergent conventions, the recurrent design 
patterns, and the key forms of new media. I considered using the words 
&#x93;&ldquo;aesthetics&#x94;&rdquo; and &#x93;&ldquo;poetics&#x94;&rdquo; instead of &#x93;&ldquo;language,&#x94;&rdquo; eventually deciding against 
them. Aesthetics implies a set of oppositions which I would like to avoid&#x97;&mdash;
between art and mass culture, between the beautiful and the ugly, between the 
valuable and the unimportant. Poetics also brings with it undesirable connotations. 
Continuing the project of Russian formalists of the 1910s, poetics was defined in 
the 1920s as a study of specific properties of particular arts, such as narrative 
literature. In Introduction to Poetics (1968) literary scholar Tzvetan Todorov 
writes: 
 

In contradistinction to the interpretation of particular works, it [poetics] 
does not seen to name meaning, but aims at a knowledge of the general 
laws that preside over the birth of each work. But in contrasdistinction to 
such sciences as psychology, sociology, etc., it seeks these laws within 
literature itself. Poetics is therefore an approach to literature at once 
&#x93;&ldquo;abstract&#x94;&rdquo; and &#x93;&ldquo;internal.&#x94;&rdquo;7 

 
In contrast to such &#x93;&ldquo;internal&#x94;&rdquo; aproach, in describing conventions, elements and 
forms of new media, I neither claim that they are unique to new media, nor do I 
consider it useful to look at it in isolation from other areas of culture. On the 
contrary, this book aims to situate new media in relation to a number of other 
areas of culture, both past and present:      
 
&bull;  other arts and media traditions: their visual languages, their strategies for 

&bull; 

organizing information and the viewer&rsquo;s experience; 
the material properties of the computer; the ways in which it is used in modern 
society; the structure of its interface and key software applications; 
&bull;  contemporary visual culture: the internal organization, iconography, 

iconology and viewer experience of various visual sites in our culture: fashion 

 

&#xC; 

39

and advertising,  supermarkets and fine art objects, television programs and 
publicity banners, offices and techno clubs; 

&bull;  contemporary information culture.  
 
The concept &ldquo;information culture,&rdquo; which is my term, can be thought of as a 
parallel to another, already familiar concept&mdash;visual culture. It includes the ways 
in which different cultural sites and objects present information: airport and train 
stations displays; road signs; television on-screen menus; graphic layouts of 
television news; the layouts of books, newspapers and magazines; the interior 
designs of banks, hotels and other commercial and leisure spaces; the interfaces of 
planes and cars and, last but not least, the interfaces of computer operating 
systems (Windows, MAC OS, UNIX) and software applications (Word, Excel, 
PowerPoint, Eudora, Navigator, RealPlayer, Filemaker, Photoshop, etc.). 
Extending the parallels with visual culture, information culture also includes 
historical methods for organizing and retrieving information (analogs of 
iconography) as well as patterns of user interaction with information objects and 
displays.  
 
Another word which needs to be commented on is &ldquo;object.&rdquo; Throughout 
the book, I use the term &ldquo;new media object,&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;product,&rdquo; &ldquo;artwork,&rdquo; 
&ldquo;interactive media,&rdquo; or other possible terms. A new media object may be a still 
digital image, a digitally composited film, a virtual 3D environment, a computer 
game, a self-contained hypermedia DVD, a hypermedia Web site, or the Web as a 
whole. The term thus fits with my aim of describing the general principles of new 
media which would hold true across all media types, all forms of organization and 
all scales. I also use &ldquo;object&rdquo; to emphasize that my concern is with the culture at 
large rather than with new media art alone. Moreover, &ldquo;Object&rdquo; is a standard term 
in the computer science and industry, used to emphasize the modular nature of 
object-oriented programming languages such as C++ and Java, object-oriented 
databases and the OLE technology used in Microsoft Office products. Thus it also 
serves my purpose to adopt the terms and paradigms of computer science for a 
theory of computerized culture. (See &ldquo;Principles of New Media&rdquo; for an 
elaboration of this idea).  

In addition, I hope to activate connotations which accompanied the use of 

the word &ldquo;object&rdquo; by the Russian avant-garde artists of the 1920s. Russian 
Constructivists and Productivists referred to their creations as objects (&ldquo;vesh,&rdquo; 
&ldquo;construktsia,&rdquo; &ldquo;predmet&rdquo;) rather than works of art. Like their Bauhaus 
counterparts, they wanted to take on the roles of industrial designers, graphic 
designers, architects, clothing designers and so on, rather than remain fine artists 
producing one-of-a kind works for museums or private collections. The word 
pointed toward the model of industrial mass production rather than the traditional 
artist&rsquo;s studio, and it implied the ideals of rational organization of labor and 
engineering efficiency which artists wanted to bring into their own work.  

 

&#xC; 

40

In the case of &ldquo;new media objects,&rdquo; all these connotations are worth invoking. In 
the world of new media, the boundary between art and design is fuzzy at best. On 
the one hand, many artists make their living as commercial designers; on the other 
hand, professional designers are typically the ones who really push the language 
of new media forward by being engaged in systematic experimentation and also 
by creating new standards and conventions. The second connotation, that of 
industrial production, also holds true for new media. Many new media projects 
are put together by large teams of people (although, in contrast to the studio 
system of the classical Hollywood era, single producers or small teams of just a 
few people are also common). Many new media objects, such as popular games or 
software applications, sell millions of copies. Yet another feature of the new 
media field which unites it with big industry is the strict adherence to various 
8
hardware and software standards.
 
of laboratory experimentation practiced by the avant-garde of the 1920s. Today, 
as more and more artists are turning to new media, few are willing to undertake 
systematic, laboratory-like research into its elements, and basic compositional, 
expressive and generative strategies. Yet this is exactly the kind of research  
which was undertaken by Russian and German avant-garde artists of the 1920&rsquo;s in 
 and Bauhaus in relation to the new media of their time: 
places like Vkhutemas
photography, film, new print technologies , telephony. Today, those few who are 
able to resist the temptation to immediately create an &ldquo;interactive CD-ROM,&rdquo; or 
to make a feature length &ldquo;digital film,&rdquo; and instead are able to focus on 
determining  the new media equivalent of a shot, a sentence, a word, or even a 
letter, are rewarded with amazing findings. 

Finally, and most importantly, I use the word object to activate the concept 

9

 

A third term which is used throughout the book and which needs to be 

commented upon is &ldquo;representation.&rdquo; In using this term I wanted to invoke 
complex and nuanced understanding of the functioning of cultural objects 
developed in humanities over the last decades. New media objects are no different 
in that respect. Thus, any new media object &mdash; a Web site, a computer game, a 
digital image, and so on &mdash; represents, as well as helps to construct, some outside 
referent: a physically existing object, historical information presented in other 
documents, a system of categories currently employed by culture as a whole or by 
some social groups or interests. As it is the case with all cultural representations, 
new media representations are also always biased. They represent / construct 
some features of physical reality at the expenses of others, one world view among 
many, one possible system of categories among numerous others possible.  

In this book I suggest that not only individual new media objects, but also 

the interfaces, both of an operating system and of commonly used software 
applications, also act as representations. That is, by organizing data in particular 
ways and by making it possible to access it in particular ways, they privilege 
particular models of the world and of the human subject. For instance, the two key 

 

&#xC; 

41

ways to organize computer data commonly used today &mdash; a hierarchical file 
system (Graphical User Interface from 1984 Macintosh onward) and a &ldquo;flat,&rdquo; non-
hierarchical network of hyperlinks (1990s World Wide Web) &mdash; represent the 
world in two fundamentally different and, in fact, opposing ways. Hierarchical 
file system assumes that the world can be reduced to a logical and hierarchical 
order, where every object has a distinct and well defined place. World Wide Web 
assumes that every object has the same importance as any other, and that 
everything is, or can be connected to everything else. Interfaces also privilege 
particular modes of data access traditionally associated with particular arts and 
media technologies. For instance, the World Wide Web of the 1990s 
foregrounded page as a basic unit of data organization (regardless of which media 
types it contains), while Acrobat software applies uses metaphor of &ldquo;video 
playback&rdquo; to text-based documents. Thus interfaces act as &ldquo;representations&rdquo; of 
older cultural forms and media, privileging some at the expense of others. This 
idea will be developed further in &ldquo;Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; section where I will 
analyze the role of cinematic and print conventions in new media.       

In describing the language of new media I found it useful to use the term 

&ldquo;representation&rdquo; in oppositions to other terms. Depending which term it is 
opposed to, the meaning of &ldquo;representation&rdquo; changes. Since these oppositions are 
introduced in different sections of the book, here I summarize all of them: 

  
(1) Representation &mdash; simulation (&ldquo;Screen&rdquo; section). Here representation 

refers to various screen technologies such as post-Renaissance painting, film, 
radar and television. I define screen as a rectangular surface which frames a 
virtual world and which exists within the physical world of a viewer without 
completely blocking her visual field. Simulation refers to technologies which aim 
to completely &ldquo;immerse&rdquo; the viewer within the virtual universe: Baroque Jesuit 
churches, nineteenth century panorama, twentieth century movie theaters. 

(2) Representation &mdash; control (&ldquo;Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; section). Here I 

oppose an image as a representation of an illusionary fictional universe and an 
image as a simulation of a control panel (for instance, GUI with its different icons 
and menus) which allows the user to control a computer. This new type of image 
can be called image-interface. The opposition representation &mdash; control 
corresponds to an opposition between depth and surface: a computer screen as a 
window into an illusionistic space versus computer screen as a flat control panel.  
 
(3) Representation &mdash; action (&ldquo;Teleaction&rdquo; section.) This is the opposition 
between technologies for creating illusions (fashion, realist paintings, dioramas, 
military decoys, film montage, digital compositing) and representational 
technologies used to enable action, i.e. to allow the viewer to manipulate reality 
through representations (maps, architectural drawings, x-ray, telepresence). I refer 
to images produced by later technologies as image-instruments. 

(4) Representation &mdash; communication (&ldquo;Teleaction&rdquo; section.) This is the 

opposition between representational technologies (film, audio and video magnetic 

 

&#xC; 

42

tape, digital storage formats) and real-time communication technologies, i.e. 
everything which begins with &ldquo;tele&rdquo; (telegraph, telephone, telex, television, 
telepresence). Representational technologies allow for creation of traditional 
aesthetic objects, i.e. something which is fixed in space or time and which refers 
to some referent(s) outside itself. By foregrounding the importance of person-to-
person telecommunication, and &ldquo;tele&rdquo;-cultural forms in general which do not 
produce any objects, new media forces us to reconsider the traditional equation 
between culture and objects.    

(5) Visual illusionism &mdash; simulation (introduction to &ldquo;Illusions&rdquo; chapter). 

Illusionism here refers both to representation and simulation as these terms are 
used in &ldquo;Screen&rdquo; section. Thus, illusionism combines traditional techniques and 
technologies which aim to create visual resemblance of reality: perspectival 
painting, cinema, panorama, etc. Simulation refers to various computer methods 
for modeling other aspects of reality beyond its visual appearance: movement of 
physical objects, shape changes over time in natural phenomena (water surface, 
smoke), motivations, behavior, speech and language comprehension in human 
beings. 

(6) Representation &mdash; information (introduction to &ldquo;Forms&rdquo; chapter). This 
opposition refers to two opposing goals of new media design: (1) immersing users 
in an imaginary fictional universe similar to traditional fiction; giving users 
efficient access to a body of  information (for instance, a search engine Web site 
or an online encyclopedia.) 
 

 

&#xC; 

43

 

I. What is New Media? 

Shall we accept this definition? If we want to understand the effects of 

 
What is new media? We may begin answering this question by listing the 
categories which are commonly discussed under this topic in popular press: 
Internet, Web sites, computer multimedia, computer games, CD-ROMs and DVD, 
virtual reality. Is this all new media is? For instance, what about television 
programs which are shot on digital video and edited on computer workstations? 
Or what about feature films which use 3D animation and digital compositing? 
Shall we count these as new media? In this case, what about all images and text-
image compositions &mdash; photographs, illustrations, layouts, ads &mdash; which are also 
created on computers and then printed on paper? Where shall we stop?  
 
As can be seen from these examples, the popular definition of new media 
identifies it with the use of a computer for distribution and exhibition, rather than 
with production. Therefore, texts distributed on a computer (Web sites and 
electronic books) are considered to be new media; texts distributed on paper are 
not. Similarly, photographs which are put on a CD-ROM and require a computer 
to view them are considered new media; the same photographs printed as a book 
are not.  
 
computerization on culture as a whole, I think it is too limiting.  There is no 
reason to privilege computer in the role of media exhibition and distribution 
machine over a computer used as a tool for media production or as a media 
storage device. All have the same potential to change existing cultural languages. 
And all have the same potential to leave culture as it is.   
 
the printing press in the fourteenth century and photography in the nineteenth 
century had a revolutionary impact on the development of modern society and 
culture, today we are in the middle of a new media revolution -- the shift of all of 
our culture to computer-mediated forms of production, distribution and 
communication. This new revolution is arguably more profound than the previous 
ones and we are just beginning to sense its initial effects. Indeed, the introduction 
of printing press affected only one stage of cultural communication -- the 
distribution of media. In the case of photography, its introduction affected only 
one type of cultural communication -- still images. In contrast, computer media 
revolution affects all stages of communication, including acquisition, 
manipulating, storage and distribution; it also affects all types of media -- text, 
still images, moving images, sound, and spatial constructions.  
 
are the ways in which the use of computers to record, store, create and distribute 
media makes it &ldquo;new&rdquo;?    

How shall we begin to map out the effects of this fundamental shift? What 

The last scenario is unlikely, however. What is more likely is that just as 

 

&#xC; 

44

In section &ldquo;Media and Computation&rdquo; I show that new media represents a 

 
convergence of two separate historical trajectories: computing and media 
technologies. Both begin in the 1830's with Babbage's Analytical Engine and 
Daguerre's daguerreotype. Eventually, in the middle of the twentieth century, a 
modern digital computer is developed to perform calculations on numerical data 
more efficiently; it takes over from numerous mechanical tabulators and 
calculators already widely employed by companies and governments since the 
turn of the century. In parallel, we witness the rise of modern media technologies 
which allow the storage of images, image sequences, sounds and text using 
different material forms: a photographic plate, a film stock, a gramophone record, 
etc. The synthesis of these two histories? The translation of all existing media into 
numerical data accessible for computers. The result is new media: graphics, 
moving images, sounds, shapes, spaces and text which become computable, i.e. 
simply another set of computer data. In &ldquo;Principles of New Media&rdquo; I look at the 
key consequences of this new status of media. Rather than focusing on familiar 
categories such as interactivity or hypermedia, I suggest a different list. This list 
reduces all principles of new media to five: numerical representation, modularity, 
automation, variability and cultural transcoding.  In the last section, &ldquo;What New 
Media is Not,&rdquo; I address other principles which are often attributed to new media. 
I show that these principles can already be found at work in older cultural forms 
and media technologies such as cinema, and therefore they are by themselves are 
not sufficient to distinguish new media from the old. 

 

 

&#xC; 

45

How Media Became New 

10

 The media 

In 1833 Charles Babbage started the design for a device he called the 

 
On August 19, 1839, the Palace of the Institute in Paris was completely full with 
curious Parisians who came to hear the formal description of the new 
reproduction process invented by Louis Daguerre. Daguerre, already well-known 
for his Diorama, called the new process daguerreotype. According to a 
contemporary, "a few days later, opticians' shops were crowded with amateurs 
panting for daguerreotype apparatus, and everywhere cameras were trained on 
buildings. Everyone wanted to record the view from his window, and he was 
lucky who at first trial got a silhouette of roof tops against the sky."
frenzy has begun. Within five months more than thirty different descriptions of 
the techniques were published all around the world: Barcelona, Edinburg, Halle, 
Naples, Philadelphia, Saint Petersburg, Stockholm. At first, daguerreotypes of 
architecture and landscapes dominated the public's imagination; two years later, 
after various technical improvements to the process, portrait galleries were 
opened everywhere &mdash; and everybody rushed in to have their picture taken by a 
new media machine.
 
Analytical Engine. The Engine contained most of the key features of the modern 
digital computer. The punch cards were used to enter both data and instructions. 
This information was stored in the Engine's memory. A processing unit, which 
Babbage referred to as a "mill," performed operations on the data and wrote the 
results to memory; final results were to be printed out on a printer. The Engine 
was designed to be capable of doing any mathematical operation; not only would 
it follow the program fed into it by cards, but it would also decide which 
instructions to execute next, based upon intermediate results. However, in contrast 
to the daguerreotype, not even a single copy of the Engine was completed. So 
while the invention of this modern media tool for the reproduction of reality 
impacted society right away, the impact of the computer was yet to be measured.   
 
Interestingly, Babbage borrowed the idea of using punch cards to store 
information from an earlier programmed machine. Around 1800, J.M. Jacquard 
invented a loom which was automatically controlled by punched paper cards. The 
loom was used to weave intricate figurative images, including Jacquard's portrait. 
This specialized graphics computer, so to speak, inspired Babbage in his work on 
the Analytical Engine, a general computer for numerical calculations. As Ada 
Augusta, Babbage's supporter and the first computer programmer, put it, "the 
Analytical Engine weaves algebraical patterns just as the Jacquard loom weaves 
flowers and leaves."
 Thus, a programmed machine was already synthesizing 
images even before it was put to process numbers. The connection between the 
Jacquard loom and the Analytical Engine is not something historians of 

11

  

12

 

&#xC; 

46

computers make much of, since for them computer image synthesis represents just 
one application of the modern digital computer among thousands of others; but 
for a historian of new media it is full of significance.    

We should not be surprised that both trajectories &mdash; the development of 

For a long time the two trajectories run in parallel without ever crossing 

modern media, and the development of computers &mdash; begin around the same time. 
Both media machines and computing machines were absolutely necessary for the 
functioning of modern mass societies. The ability to disseminate the same texts, 
images and sounds to millions of citizens thus assuring that they will have the 
same ideological beliefs was as essential as the ability to keep track of their birth 
records, employment records, medical records, and police records. Photography, 
film, the offset printing press, radio and television made the former possible while 
computers made possible the latter. Mass media and data processing are the 
complimentary technologies of a modern mass society; they appear together and 
develop side by side, making this society possible. 
 
paths.  Throughout the nineteenth and the early twentieth century, numerous 
mechanical and electrical tabulators and calculators were developed; they were 
gradually getting faster and their use was became more wide spread. In parallel, 
we witness the rise of modern media which allows the storage of images, image 
sequences, sounds and text in different material forms: a photographic plate, film 
stock, a gramophone record, etc.  
Let us continue tracing this joint history. In the 1890s modern media took 
 
another step forward as still photographs were put in motion. In January of 1893, 
the first movie studio &mdash; Edison's "Black Maria" &mdash; started producing twenty 
seconds shorts which were shown in special Kinetoscope parlors. Two years later 
the Lumi&egrave;re brothers showed their new Cin&eacute;matographie camera/projection 
hybrid first to a scientific audience, and, later, in December of 1895, to the paying 
public. Within a year, the audiences in Johannesburg, Bombay, Rio de Janeiro, 
Melbourne, Mexico City, and Osaka were subjected to the new media machine, 
and they found it irresistible.
 Gradually the scenes grew longer, the staging of 
reality before the camera and the subsequent editing of its samples became more 
intricate, and the copies multiplied. They would be sent to Chicago and Calcutta, 
to London and St. Petersburg, to Tokyo and Berlin and thousands and thousands 
of smaller places. Film images would soothe movie audiences, who were too 
eager to escape the reality outside, the reality which no longer could be 
adequately handled by their own sampling and data processing systems (i.e., their 
brains). Periodic trips into the dark relaxation chambers of movie theaters became 
a routine survival technique for the subjects of modern society.     
The 1890s was the crucial decade, not only for the development of media, 
 
but also for computing. If individuals' brains were overwhelmed by the amounts 
of information they had to process, the same was true of corporations and of 
government. In 1887, the U.S. Census office was still interpreting the figures from 

13

 

&#xC; 

47

14

 

We are now in the new century. The year is 1936. This year the British 

the 1880 census. For the next 1890 census, the Census Office adopted electric 
tabulating machines designed by Herman Hollerith. The data collected for every 
person was punched into cards; 46, 804 enumerators completed forms for a total 
population of 62,979,766. The Hollerith tabulator opened the door for the 
adoption of calculating machines by business; during the next decade electric 
tabulators became standard equipment in insurance companies, public utilities 
companies, railroads and accounting departments. In 1911, Hollerith's Tabulating 
Machine company was merged with three other companies to form the 
Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company; in 1914 Thomas J. Watson was 
chosen as its head. Ten years later its business tripled and Watson renamed the 
company the International Business Machines Corporation, or IBM.
 
mathematician Alan Turing wrote a seminal paper entitled "On Computable 
Numbers." In it he provided a theoretical description of a general-purpose 
computer later named after its inventor the Universal Turing Machine. Even 
though it was only capable of four operations, the machine could perform any 
calculation which can be done by a human and could also imitate any other 
computing machine. The machine operated by reading and writing numbers on an 
endless tape. At every step the tape would be advanced to retrieve the next 
command, to read the data or to write the result. Its diagram looks suspiciously 
like a film projector. Is this a coincidence?  
 
the essence of cinema is recording and storing visible data in a material form. A 
film camera records data on film; a film projector reads it off. This cinematic 
apparatus is similar to a computer in one key respect: a computer's program and 
data also have to be stored in some medium. This is why the Universal Turing 
Machine looks like a film projector. It is a kind of film camera and film projector 
at once: reading instructions and data stored on endless tape and writing them in 
other locations on this tape. In fact, the development of a suitable storage medium 
and a method for coding data represent important parts of both cinema and 
computer pre-histories. As we know, the inventors of cinema eventually settled on 
using discrete images recorded on a strip of celluloid; the inventors of a computer 
&mdash; which needed much greater speed of access as well as the ability to quickly 
read and write data &mdash; came to store it electronically in a binary code. 
 
Starting this year, and continuing into the Second World War, German engineer 
Konrad Zuse had been building a computer in the living room of his parents' 
apartment in Berlin. Zuse's computer was the first working digital computer. One 
of his innovations was program control by punched tape. The tape Zuse used was 
actually discarded 35 mm movie film.
 
the original frames of an interior shot. A typical movie scene &mdash; two people in a 

One of these surviving pieces of this film shows binary code punched over 

If we believe the word cinematograph, which means "writing  movement," 

In the same year, 1936, the two trajectories came even closer together. 

15

  

 

&#xC; 

48

But this is not yet the end of the story. Our story has a new twist &mdash; a 

room involved in some action &mdash; becomes a support  for a set of computer 
commands. Whatever meaning and emotion was contained in this movie scene 
has been wiped out by its new function as a data carrier. The pretense of modern 
media to create simulation of sensible reality is similarly canceled; media is 
reduced to its original condition as information carrier, nothing else, nothing 
more. In a technological remake of the Oedipal complex, a son murders his father. 
The iconic code of cinema is discarded in favor of the more efficient binary one. 
Cinema becomes a slave to the computer.      
 
happy one. Zuse's film, with its strange superimposition of the binary code over 
the iconic code anticipates the convergence which gets underway half a century 
later. The two separate historical trajectories finally meet. Media and computer &mdash; 
Daguerre's daguerreotype and Babbage's Analytical Engine, the Lumi&egrave;re 
Cin&eacute;matographie and Hollerith's tabulator &mdash; merge into one. All existing media 
are translated into numerical data accessible for the computers. The result: 
graphics, moving images, sounds, shapes, spaces and text become computable, 
i.e. simply another set of computer data. In short, media becomes new media.   
This meeting changes both the identity of media and of the computer 
 
itself. No longer just a calculator, a control mechanism or a communication 
device, a computer becomes a media processor. Before the computer could read a 
row of numbers outputting a statistical result or a gun trajectory. Now it can read 
pixel values, blurring the image, adjusting its contrast or checking whether it 
contains an outline of an object. Building upon these lower-level operations, it can 
also perform more ambitious ones: searching image databases for images similar 
in composition or content to an input image; detecting shot changes in a movie; or 
synthesizing the movie shot itself, complete with setting and the actors. In a 
historical loop, a computer returned to its origins. No longer just an Analytical 
Engine, suitable only to crunch numbers, the computer became Jacqurd's loom &mdash; 
a media synthesizer and manipulator.  
 

 

&#xC; 

49

 

Principles of New Media 

Not every new media object obeys these principles. They should be 

 
The identity of media has changed even more dramatically. Below I summarize 
some of the key differences between old and new media. In compiling this list of 
differences I tried to arrange them in a logical order. That is, the principles 3-5 are 
dependent on the principles 1-2. This is not dissimilar to axiomatic logic where 
certain axioms are taken as staring points and further theorems are proved on their 
basis. 
 
considered not as some absolute laws but rather as general tendencies of a culture 
undergoing computerization. As the computerization affects deeper and deeper 
layers of culture, these tendencies will manifest themselves more and more.   
 
 
1. Numerical Representation 
 
All new media objects, whether they are created from scratch on computers or 
converted from analog media sources, are composed of digital code; they are 
numerical representations. This has two key consequences: 
 

1.1. New media object can be described formally (mathematically). For 
instance, an image or a shape can be described using a mathematical function.  

1.2. New media object is a subject to algorithmic manipulation. For 
instance, by applying appropriate algorithms, we can automatically remove 
"noise" from a photograph, improve its contrast, locate the edges of the shapes, or 
change its proportions. In short, media becomes programmable. 
 
When new media objects are created on computers, they originate in numerical 
form. But many new media objects are converted from various forms of old 
media. Although most readers understand the difference between analog and 
digital media, few notes should be added on the terminology and the conversion 
process itself. This process assumes that data is originally continuos, i.e. &ldquo;the axis 
or dimension that is measured has no apparent indivisible unit from which it is 
composed.&rdquo;
digitization. Digitization consists from two steps: sampling and quantization. 
First, data is sampled, most often at regular intervals, such as the grid of pixels 
used to represent a digital image. Technically, a sample is defined as &ldquo;a 
measurement made at a particular instant in space and time, according to a 
specified procedure.&rdquo; The frequency of sampling is referred to as resolution. 
Sampling turns continuos data into discrete data. This is data occurring in distinct 
units: people, pages of a book, pixels. Second, each sample is quantified, i.e. 

 Converting continuos data into a numerical representation is called 

16

 

&#xC; 

50

17
 

While some old media such as photography and sculpture is truly 

assigned a numerical vale drawn from a defined range (such as 0-255 in the case 
of a 8-bit greyscale image).
 
continuos, most involve the combination of continuos and discrete coding. One 
example is motion picture film: each frame is a continuos photograph, but time is 
broken into a number of samples (frames). Video goes one step further by 
sampling the frame along the vertical dimension (scan lines). Similarly, a 
photograph printed using a halftone process combine discrete and continuos 
representations. Such photograph consist from a number of orderly dots (i.e., 
samples), however the diameters and areas of dots vary continuously.  

As the last example demonstrates, while old media contains level(s) of 

18

 In postulating this, 

discrete representation, the samples were never quantified. This quantification of 
samples is the crucial step accomplished by digitization. But why, we may ask, 
modern media technologies were often in part discrete? The key assumption of 
modern semiotics is that communication requires discrete units. Without discrete 
units, there is no language. As Roland Barthes has put it, &ldquo;language is, as it were, 
that which divides reality (for instance the continuos spectrum of the colors is 
verbally reduced to a series of discontinuous terms).
semioticians took human language as a prototypical example of a communication 
system. A human language is discrete on most scales: we speak in sentences; a 
sentence is made from words; a word consists from morphemes, and so on. If we 
are to follow the assumption that any form of communication requires discrete 
representation, we may expect that media used in cultural communication will 
have discrete levels. At first this explanation seems to work. Indeed, a film 
samples continuos time of human existence into discrete frames; a drawing 
samples visible reality into discrete lines; and a printed photograph samples it into 
discrete dots. This assumption does not universally work, however: photographs, 
for instance, do not have any apparent units. (Indeed, in the 1970s semiotics was 
criticized for its linguistic bias, and most semioticians came to recognize that 
language-based model of distinct units of meaning can&rsquo;t be applied to many kinds 
of cultural communication.) More importantly, the discrete units of modern media 
are usually not the units of meanings, the way morphemes are. Neither film 
frames not the halftone dots have any relation to how film or a photographs affect 
the viewer (except in modern art and avant-garde film &mdash; think of paintings by 
Roy Lichtenstein and films of Paul Sharits &mdash; which often make the &ldquo;material&rdquo; 
units of media into the units of meaning.) 
 
emerges during Industrial Revolution. In the nineteenth century, a new 
organization of production known as factory system gradually replaced artisan 
labor. It reached its classical form when Henry Ford installed first assembly line 
in his factory in 1913. The assembly line relied on two principles. The first was 
standardization of parts, already employed in the production of military uniforms 

The more likely reason why modern media has discrete levels is because it 

 

&#xC; 

51

in the nineteenth century. The second, never principle, was the separation of the 
production process into a set of repetitive, sequential, and simple activities that 
could be executed by workers who did not have to master the entire process and 
could be easily replaced.      

Not surprisingly, modern media follows the factory logic, not only in 
terms of division of labor as witnessed in Hollywood film studios, animation 
studios or television production, but also on the level of its material organization. 
The invention of typesetting machines in the 1880s industrialized publishing 
while leading to standardization of both type design and a number and types of 
fonts used. In the 1890s cinema combined automatically produced images (via 
photography) with a mechanical projector. This required standardization of both 
image dimensions (size, frame ratio, contrast) and of sampling rate of time (see 
&ldquo;Digital Cinema&rdquo; section for more detail). Even earlier, in the 1880s, first 
television systems already involved standardization of sampling both in time and 
in space. These modern media systems also followed the factory logic in that once 
a new &ldquo;model&rdquo; (a film, a photograph, an audio recording) was introduced, 
numerous identical media copies would be produced from this master. As I will 
show below, new media follows, or actually, runs ahead of a quite a different 
logic of post-industrial society &mdash; that of individual customization, rather that of 
mass standardization.   
 
 
2. Modularity   
 
This principle can be called "fractal structure of new media.&rdquo; Just as a fractal has 
the same structure on different scales, a new media object has the same modular 
structure throughout. Media elements, be it images, sounds, shapes, or behaviors, 
are represented as collections of discrete samples (pixels, polygons, voxels, 
characters, scripts). These elements are assembled into larger-scale objects but 
they continue to maintain their separate identity. The objects themselves can be 
combined into even larger objects -- again, without losing their independence. For 
example, a multimedia "movie" authored in popular Macromedia Director 
software may consist from hundreds of still images, QuickTime movies, and 
sounds which are all stored separately and are loaded at run time. Because all 
elements are stored independently, they can be modified at any time without 
having to change Director movie itself. These movies can be assembled into a 
larger "movie," and so on. Another example of modularity is the concept of 
&ldquo;object&rdquo; used in Microsoft Office applications. When an object is inserted into a 
document (for instance, a media clip inserted into a Word document), it continues 
to maintain its independence and can always be edited with the program used 
originally to create it. Yet another example of modularity is the structure of a 
HTML document: with the exemption of text, it consists from a number of 

 

&#xC; 

52

separate objects &mdash; GIF and JPEG images, media clips, VRML scenes, 
Schockwave and Flash movies -- which are all stored independently locally 
and/or on a network. In short, a new media object consists from independent parts 
which, in their turn, consist from smaller independent parts, and so on, up to the 
level of smallest &ldquo;atoms&rdquo; such as pixels, 3D points or characters. 

World Wide Web as a whole is also completely modular. It consists from 
numerous Web pages, each in its turn consisting from separate media elements. 
Every element can be always accessed on its own. Normally we think of elements 
as belonging to their corresponding Web sites, but this just a convention, 
reinforced by commercial Web browsers. Netomat browser which extract 
elements of a particular media type from different Web pages (for instance, only 
images) and display them together without identifying the Web sites they come 
from, highlights for us this fundamentally discrete and non-hierarchical 
organization of the Web (see introduction to &ldquo;Interface&rdquo; chapter for more on this 
browser.) 

In addition to using the metaphor of a fractal, we can also make an 

analogy between modularity of new media and the structured computer 
programming. Structural computer programming which became standard in the 
1970s involves writing small and self-sufficient modules (called in different 
computer languages subroutines, functions, procedures, scripts) which are 
assembled into larger programs. Many new media objects are in fact computer 
programs which follow structural programming style. For example, most 
interactive multimedia applications are programs written in Macromedia 
Director&rsquo;s Lingo. A Lingo program defines scripts which control various repeated 
actions, such as clicking on a button; these scripts are assembled into larger 
scripts. In the case of new media objects which are not computer programs, an 
analogy with structural programming still can be made because their parts can be 
accessed, modified or substituted without affecting the overall structure of an 
object. This analogy, however, has its limits. If a particular module of a computer 
program is deleted, the program would not run. In contrast, just as it is the case 
with traditional media, deleting parts of a new media object does not render its 
meaningless. In fact, the modular structure of new media makes such deletion and 
substitution of parts particularly easy. For example, since a HTML document 
consists from a number of separate objects each represented by a line of HTML 
code, it is very easy to delete, substitute or add new objects. Similarly, since in 
Photoshop the parts a digital image are usually placed on separate layers, these 
parts can be deleted and substituted with a click of a button. 
 
 
3. Automation  
 

 

 

&#xC; 

53

19

Numerical coding of media (principle 1) and modular structure of a media object 
(principle 2) allow to automate many operations involved in media creation,  
manipulation and access. Thus human intentionally can be removed from the 
creative process, at least in part.
 The following are some of the examples of what can be called &ldquo;low-
 
level&rdquo; automation of media creation, in which the computer user modifies or 
creates from scratch a media object using templates or simple algorithms. These 
techniques are robust enough so that they are included in most commercial 
software for image editing, 3D graphics, word processing, graphic layout, and so 
on. Image editing programs such as Photoshop can automatically correct scanned 
images, improving contrast range and removing noise. They also come with filters 
which can automatically modify an image, from creating simple variations of 
color to changing the whole image as though it was painted by Van Gog, Seurat 
or other brand-name artist. Other computer programs can automatically generate 
3D objects such as trees, landscapes, human figures and detailed ready-to-use 
animations of complex natural phenomena such as fire and waterfalls. In 
Hollywood films, flocks of birds, ant colonies and crowds of people are 
automatically created by AL (artificial life) software. Word processing, page 
layout, presentation and Web creation programs come with "agents" which can 
automatically create the layout of a document. Writing software helps the user to 
create literary narratives using formalized highly conventions genre convention. 
Finally, in what maybe the most familiar experience of automation of media 
generation to most computer users, many Web sites automatically generate Web 
pages on the fly when the user reaches the site. They assemble the information 
from the databases and format it using generic templates and scripts.  
 
The researchers are also working on what can be called &ldquo;high-level&rdquo; 
automation of media creation which requires a computer to understand, to a 
certain degree, the meanings embedded in the objects being generated, i.e. their 
semantics. This research can be seen as a part of a larger initiative of artificial 
intelligence (AI). As it is well known, AI project achieved only very limited 
success since its beginnings in the 1950s. Correspondingly, work on media 
generation which requires understanding of semantics is also in the research stage 
and is rarely included in commercial software. Beginning in the 1970s, computers 
were often used to generate poetry and fiction. In the 1990s, the users of Internet 
chat rooms became familiar with bots -- the computer programs which simulate 
human conversation. The researchers at New York University showed a &ldquo;virtual 
theater&rdquo; composed of a few &ldquo;virtual actors&rdquo; which adjust their behavior in real-
 The MIT Media Lab developed a number of 
time in response to user&rsquo;s actions.
different projects devoted to &ldquo;high-level&rdquo; automation of media creation and use: a 
&ldquo;smart camera&rdquo; which can automatically follow the action and frame the shots 
given a script;
 ALIVE,  a virtual environment where the user interacted with 

21

  

20

 

&#xC; 

54

22

23

  

 a new kind of human-computer interface where the 

animated characters;
computer presents itself to a user as an animated talking character. The character, 
generated by a computer in real-time, communicates with user using natural 
language; it also tries to guess user&rsquo;s emotional state and to adjust the style of 
interaction accordingly.

The area of new media where the average computer user encountered AI 
in the 1990s was not, however, human-computer interface, but computer games. 
Almost every commercial game includes a component called AI engine. It stands 
for part of the game&rsquo;s computer code which controls its characters: car drivers in a 
car race simulation, the enemy forces in a strategy game such as Command and 
Conquer, the single enemies which keep attacking the user in first-person shooters 
such as Quake. AI engines use a variety of approaches to simulate human 
intelligence, from rule-based systems to neural networks. Like AI expert systems, 
these characters have expertise in some well-defined but narrow area such as 
attacking the user. But because computer games are highly codified and rule-
based, these characters function very effectively. That is, they effectively respond 
to whatever few things the user are allowed to ask them to do: run forward, shoot, 
pick up an object. They can&rsquo;t do anything else, but then the game does not 
provide the opportunity for the user to test this. For instance, in a martial arts 
fighting game, I can&rsquo;t ask questions of my opponent, nor do I expect him or her to 
start a conversation with me. All I can do is to &ldquo;attack&rdquo; my opponent by pressing 
a few buttons; and within this highly codified situation the computer can &ldquo;fight&rdquo; 
me back very effectively. In short, computer characters can display intelligence 
and skills only because the programs put severe limits on our possible interactions 
with them. Put differently, the computers can pretend to be intelligent only by 
tricking us into using a very small part of who we are when we communicate with 
them. So, to use another example, at 1997 SIGGRAPH convention I was playing 
against both human and computer-controlled characters in a VR simulation of 
some non-existent sport game. All my opponents appeared as simple blobs 
covering a few pixels of my VR display; at this resolution, it made absolutely no 
difference who was human and who was not.  

Along with &ldquo;low-level&rdquo; and &ldquo;high-level&rdquo; automation of media creation, 
another area of media use which is being subjected to increasing automation is 
media access. The switch to computers as means to store and access enormous 
amount of media material, exemplified by the by &ldquo;media assets&rdquo; stored in the 
databases of stock agencies and global entertainment conglomerates, as well as by 
the public &ldquo;media assets&rdquo; distributed across numerous Web sites, created the need 
to find more efficient ways to classify and search media objects. Word processors 
and other text management software for a long time provided the abilities to 
search for specific strings of text and automatically index documents. UNIX 
operating system also always included powerful commands to search and filter 
text files. In the 1990s software designers started to provide media users with 

 

&#xC; 

55

similar abilities. Virage introduced Virage VIR Image Engine which allows to 
search for visually similar image content among millions of images as well as a 
set of video search tools to allow indexing and searching video files.
of the 1990s, the key Web search engines already included the options to search 
the Internet by specific media such as images, video and audio. 

24

 By the end 

The Internet, which can be thought of as one huge distributed media 

database, also crystallized the basic condition of the new information society: 
over-abundance of information of all kind. One response was the popular idea of 
software &ldquo;agents&rdquo; designed to automate searching for relevant information.  Some 
agents act as filters which deliver small amounts of information given user's 
criteria. Others are allowing users to tap into the expertise of other users, 
following their selections and choices. For example, MIT Software Agents Group 
developed such agents as BUZZwatch which &ldquo;distills and tracks trends, themes, 
and topics within collections of texts across time&rdquo; such as Internet discussions and 
Web pages; Letizia, &ldquo;a user interface agent that assists a user browsing the World 
Wide Web by&hellip; scouting ahead from the user's current position to find Web 
pages of possible interest&rdquo;; and Footprints which &ldquo;uses information left by other 
people to help you find your way around.&rdquo;

25

 

By the end of the twentieth century, the problem became no longer how to 
create a new media object such as an image; the new problem was how to find the 
object which already exists somewhere. That is, if you want a particular image, 
chances are it is already exists -- but it may be easier to create one from scratch 
when to find the existing one. Beginning in the nineteenth century, modern 
society developed technologies which automated media creation: a photo camera, 
a film camera, a tape recorder, a video recorder, etc. These technologies allowed 
us, over the course of one hundred and fifty years, to accumulate an 
unprecedented amount of media materials: photo archives, film libraries, audio 
archives&hellip;This led to the next stage in media evolution: the need for new 
technologies to store, organize and efficiently access these media materials. These 
new technologies are all computer-based: media databases; hypermedia and other 
ways of organizing media material such the hierarchical file system itself; text 
management software; programs for content-based search and retrieval. Thus 
automation of media access is the next logical stage of the process which was 
already put into motion when a first photograph was taken. The emergence of new 
media coincides with this second stage of a media society, now concerned as 
26
much with accessing and re-using existing media as with creating new one.
(See &ldquo;Database&rdquo; section for more on databases). 
 
 
4. Variability  
 

 

 

 

&#xC; 

56

A new media object is not something fixed once and for all but can exist in 
different, potentially infinite, versions. This is another consequence of  numerical 
coding of media (principle 1) and modular structure of a media object (principle 
2). Other terms which are often used in relation to new media and which would be 
appropriate instead of &ldquo;variable&rdquo; is  &ldquo;mutable&rdquo; and &ldquo;liquid.&rdquo; 

Old media involved a human creator who manually assembled textual, 
visual and/or audio elements into a particular composition or a sequence. This 
sequence was stored in some material, its order determined once and for all. 
Numerous copies could be run off from the master, and, in perfect correspondence 
with the logic of an industrial society, they were all identical. New media, in 
contrast, is characterized by variability. Instead of identical copies a new media 
object typically gives rise to many different versions. And rather being created 
completely by a human author, these versions are often in part automatically 
assembled by a computer. (The already quoted example of Web pages 
automatically generated from databases using the templates created by Web 
designers can be invoke here as well.) Thus the principle of variability is closely 
connected to automation.    

Variability would also will not be possible without modularity. Stored 

digitally, rather than in some fixed medium, media elements maintain their 
separate identity and can be assembled into numerous sequences under program 
control. In addition, because the elements themselves are broken into discrete 
samples (for instance, an image is represented as an array of pixels), they can be 
also created and customized on the fly.  

The logic of new media thus corresponds to the post-industrial logic of 

"production on demand" and "just in time" delivery which themselves were made 
possible by the use of  computers and computer networks in all stages of 
manufacturing and distribution. Here "culture industry" (the term was originally 
coined by Theodor Adorno in the 1930s) is actually ahead of the rest of the 
industry. The idea that a customer determines the exact features of her car at the 
showroom, the data is then transmitted to the factory, and hours later the new car 
is delivered, remains a dream, but in the case of computer media, it is reality. 
Since the same machine is used as a showroom and a factory, i.e., the same 
computer generates and displays media -- and since the media exists not as a 
material object but as data which can be sent through the wires with the speed of 
light, the customized version created in response to user&rsquo;s input is delivered 
almost immediately. Thus, to continue with the same example, when you access a 
Web site, the server immediately assembles a customized Web page.    

Here are some particular cases of the variability principle (most of them 

will be discussed in more detail in later chapters):  

4.1. Media elements are stored in a media database; a variety of end-user 

objects which vary both in resolution, in form and in content can be generated, 
either beforehand, or on demand, from this database. At first, we may think that 
this is simply a particular technological implementation of variability principle, 

 

&#xC; 

57

27

  

4.2. It becomes possible to separate the levels of "content" (data) and 

but, as I will show in &ldquo;Database&rdquo; section, in a computer age database comes to 
function as a cultural form of its own. It offers a particular model of the world and 
of the human experience. It also affects how the user conceives of data which it 
contains.  
 
interface. A number of different interfaces can be created to the same data. A new 
media object can be defined as one or more interfaces to a multimedia database 
(see introduction to &ldquo;Interface&rdquo; chapter and &ldquo;Database&rdquo; section for more 
discussion of this principle).
 
4.3. The information about the user can be used by a computer program to 
automatically customize the media composition as well as to create the elements 
themselves. Examples: Web sites use the information about the type of hardware 
and browser or user's network address to automatically customize the site which 
the user will see; interactive computer installations use information about the 
user's body movements to generate sounds, shapes, and images, or to control 
behaviors of artificial creatures.  
 
4.4. A particular case of 4.3 is branching-type interactivity (sometimes 
also called menu-based interactivity.) This term refers to programs in which all 
the possible objects which the user can visit form a branching tree structure. 
When the user reaches a particular object, the program presents her with choices 
and let her pick. Depending on the value chosen, the user advances along a 
particular branch of the tree. For instance, in Myst each screen typically contains 
a left and a right button, clicking on the button retrieves a new screen, and so on. 
In this case the information used by a program is the output of user's cognitive 
process, rather than the network address or body position. (See &ldquo;Menus, Filters, 
Plug-ins&rdquo; for more discussion of this principle.)  

4.5. Hypermedia is another popular new media structure, which 

conceptually is close to branching-type interactivity (because quite often the 
elements are connected using a branch tree structure). In hypermedia, the 
multimedia elements making a document are connected through hyperlinks. Thus 
the elements and the structure are independent of each other --rather than hard-
wired together, as in traditional media. World Wide Web is a particular 
implementation of hypermedia in which the elements are distributed throughout 
the network . Hypertext is a particular case of hypermedia which uses only one 
media type &mdash; text. How does the principle of variability works in this case? We 
can conceive of all possible paths through a hypermedia document as being 
different versions of it. By following the links the user retrieves a particular 
version of a document. 
 
are commonly generated in computer culture is through periodic updates. 
Networks allow the content of a new media object to be periodically updating 
while keeping its structure intact. For instance, modern software applications can 

4.6. Another way in which different versions of the same media objects 

 

&#xC; 

58

 

periodically check for updates on the Internet and then download and install these 
updates, sometimes without any actions from the user. Most Web sites are also 
periodically updated either manually or automatically, when the data in the 
databases which drives the sites changes. A particularly interesting case of this 
&ldquo;updateability&rdquo; feature is the sites which update some information, such as such 
as stock prices or weather, continuosly. 
 
4.7. One of the most basic cases of the variability principle is scalability, 
in which different versions of the same media object can be generated at various 
sizes or levels of detail. The metaphor of a map is useful in thinking about the 
scalability principle. If we equate a new media object with a physical territory, 
different versions of this object are like maps of this territory, generated at 
different scales. Depending on the scale chosen, a map provides more or less 
detail about the territory. Indeed, different versions of a new media object may 
vary strictly quantitatively, i.e. in the amount of detail present: for instance, a full 
size image and its icon, automatically generated by Photoshop; a full text and its 
shorter version, generated by &ldquo;Autosummarize&rdquo; command in Microsoft Word 97; 
or the different versions which can be created using &ldquo;Outline&rdquo; command in Word. 
Beginning with version 3 (1997), Apple&rsquo;s QuickTime format also made possible 
to imbed a number of different versions which differ in size within a single 
QuickTime movie; when a Web user accesses the movie, a version is 
automatically selected depending on connection speed. Conceptually similar 
technique called &ldquo;distancing&rdquo; or &ldquo;level of detail&rdquo; is used in interactive virtual 
worlds such as VRML scenes. A designer creates a  number of models of the 
same object, each with progressively less detail. When the virtual camera is close 
to the object, a highly detailed model is used; if the object is far away, a lesser 
detailed version is automatically substituted by a program to save unnecessary 
computation of detail which can&rsquo;t be seen anyway.  

New media also allows to create versions of the same object which differ 

from each other in more substantial ways. Here the comparison with maps of 
diffident scales no longer works. The examples of commands in commonly used 
software packages which allow to create such qualitatively different versions are 
&ldquo;Variations&rdquo; and &ldquo;Adjustment layers&rdquo; in Photoshop 5 and &ldquo;writing style&rdquo; option 
in Word&rsquo;s &ldquo;Spelling and Grammar&rdquo; command. More examples can be found on 
the Internet were, beginning in the middle of the 1990s, it become common to 
create a few different versions of a Web site. The user with a fast connection can 
choose a rich multimedia  version while the user with a slow connection can settle 
for a more bare-bones version which loads faster.   

Among new media artworks, David Blair&rsquo;s WaxWeb, a Web site which is 

an &ldquo;adaptation&rdquo; of an hour long video narrative, offers a more radical 
implementation of the scalability principle. While interacting with the narrative, 
the user at any point can change the scale of representation, going from an image-
based outline of the movie to a complete script or a particular shot, or a VRML 

 

&#xC; 

59

28

 Another example of how use of scalability 

scene based on this shot, and so on.
principle can create a dramatically new experience of an old media object is 
Stephen Mamber&rsquo;s database-driven representation of Hitchock&rsquo;s Birds. Mamber&rsquo;s 
software generates a still for every shot of the film; it then automatically 
combines all the stills into a rectangular matrix. Every cell in the matrix 
corresponds to a particular shot from the film. As a result, time is spatialized, 
similar to how it was done in Edisons&rsquo;s early Kinetoscope cylinders (see &ldquo;The 
Myths of New Media.&rdquo;) Spatializing the film allows us to study its different 
temporal structures which would be hard to observe otherwise. As in WaxWeb, 
the user can at any point change the scale of representation, going from a 
complete film to a particular shot. 

As can be seen, the principle of variability is a useful in allowing us to 
connect many important characteristics of new media which on first sight may 
appear unrelated. In particular, such popular new media structures as branching 
(or menu) interactivity and hypermedia can be seen as particular instances of 
variability principle (4.4 and 4.5, respectively). In the case of branching 
interactivity, the user plays an active role in determining the order in which the 
already generated elements are accessed. This is the simplest kind of interactivity; 
more complex kinds are also possible where both the elements and the structure 
of the whole object are either modified or generated on the fly in response to 
user's interaction with a program. We can refer to such implementations as open 
interactivity to distinguish them from the closed interactivity which uses fixed 
elements arranged in a fixed branching structure. Open interactivity can be 
implemented using a variety of approaches, including procedural and object-
oriented computer programming, AI, AL, and neural networks. 

As long as there exist some kernel, some structure, some prototype which 
remains unchanged throughout the interaction, open interactivity can be thought 
of as a subset of variability principle. Here useful analogy can be made with 
theory of family resemblance by Witgenstein, later developed into the influential 
theory of prototypes by cognitive psychologist Eleonor Rosh. In a family, a 
number of relatives will share some features, although no single family member 
may posses all of the features. Similarly, according to the theory of prototypes, 
the meanings of many words in a natural language derive not through a logical 
definition but through a proximity to certain prototype. 

Hypermedia, the other popular structure of new media,  can also be seen 
as a particular case of the more general principle of variability. According to the 
definition by Halacz and Swartz, hypermedia systems &ldquo;provide their users with 
the ability to create, manipulate and/or examine a network of information-
containing nodes interconnected by relational links.&rdquo;
individual media elements (images, pages of text, etc.) always retain their 
individual identity (the principle of modularity), they can be "wired" together into 
more than one object. Hyperlinking is a particular way to achieve this wiring. A 

 Since in new media the 

29

 

&#xC; 

60

hyperlink creates a connection between two elements, for example between two 
words in two different pages or a sentence on one page and an image in another, 
or two different places within the same page. The elements connected through 
hyperlinks can exist on the same computer or on different computers connected 
on a network, as in the case of World Wide Web.  

30

If in traditional media the elements are "hardwired" into a unique structure 
and no longer maintain their separate identity, in hypermedia the elements and the 
structure are separate from each other. The structure of hyperlinks -- typically a 
branching tree - can be specified independently from the contents of a document. 
To make an analogy with grammar of a natural language as described in Noam 
 we can compare a hypermedia structure 
Chomsky&rsquo;s early linguistic theory,
which specifies the connections between the nodes with a deep structure of a 
sentence; a particular hypermedia text can be then compared with a particular 
sentence in a natural language. Another useful analogy is with computer 
programming. In programming, there is clear separation between  algorithms and 
data. An algorithm specifies the sequence of steps to be performed on any data, 
just as a hypermedia structure specifies a set of navigation paths (i.e., connections 
between the nodes) which potentially can be applied to any set of media objects.  
The principle of variability also exemplifies how, historically, the changes 

in media technologies are correlated with changes the social change. If the logic 
of old media corresponded to the logic of industrial mass society, the logic of new 
media fits the logic of the post-industrial society which values individuality over 
conformity. In industrial mass society everybody was supposed to enjoy the same 
goods -- and to have the same beliefs. This was also the logic of media 
technology. A media object was assembled in a media factory (such as a 
Hollywood studio). Millions of identical copies were produced from a master and 
distributed to all the citizens. Broadcasting, cinema, print media all followed this 
logic.  

In a post-industrial society, every citizen can construct her own custom 

lifestyle and "select" her ideology from a large (but not infinite) number of 
choices. Rather than pushing the same objects/information to a mass audience, 
marketing now tries to target each individual separately. The logic of new media 
technology reflects this new social logic. Every visitor to a Web site automatically 
gets her own custom version of the site created on the fly from a database. The 
language of the text, the contents, the ads displayed &mdash; all these can be 
customized by interpreting the information about where on the network the user is 
coming from; or,  if the user previously registered with the site, her personal 
profile can be used for this customization. According to a report in USA Today 
(November 9, 1999), &ldquo;Unlike ads in magazines or other real-world publications, 
&lsquo;banner&rsquo; ads on Web pages change wit every page view. And most of the 
companies that place the ads on the Web site track your movements across the 
Net, &lsquo;remembering&rsquo; which ads you&rsquo;ve seen, exactly when you saw them, whether 

 

&#xC; 

61

you clicked on them, where you were at the time and the site you have visited just 
before.&rdquo;

31

  

More generally, every hypertext reader gets her own version of the 

complete text by selecting a particular path through it. Similarly, every user of an 
interactive installation gets her own version of the work. And so on.  In this way 
new media technology acts as the most perfect realization of the utopia of an ideal 
society composed from unique individuals. New media objects assure users that 
their choices &mdash; and therefore, their underlying thoughts and desires &mdash; are 
unique, rather than pre-programmed and shared with others. As though trying to 
compensate for their earlier role in making us all the same, today descendants of 
the Jacqurd's loom, the Hollerith tabulator and Zuse's cinema-computer are now 
working to convince us that we are all unique. 

32

The principle of variability as it is presented here is not dissimilar to how 
 I believe that we differ 

the artist and curator Jon Ippolito uses the same concept.
in how we use the concept of variability in two key respects. First, Ippolito uses 
variability to describe a characteristic shared by recent conceptual and some 
digital art, while I see variability as a basic condition of all new media. Second, 
Ippolito follows the tradition of conceptual art where an artist can vary any 
dimension of the artwork, even its content; my use of the term aims to reflect the 
logic of  mainstream culture where versions of the object share some well-defined 
&ldquo;data.&rdquo; This &ldquo;data&rdquo; which can be a well-known narrative (Psycho), an icon (Coca-
Cola sign), a character (Mickey Mouse) or a famous star (Madonna), is referred in 
media industry as &ldquo;property.&rdquo; Thus all cultural projects produced by Madonna 
will be automatically united by her name. Using the theory of prototypes, we can 
say that the property acts as a prototype, and different versions are derived from 
this prototype. Moreover, when a number of versions  are being commercially 
released based on some &ldquo;property&rdquo;, usually one of these versions is treated as the 
source of  the &ldquo;data,&rdquo; with others positioned as being derived from this source. 
Typically the version which is in the same media as the original &ldquo;property&rdquo; is 
treated as the source. For instance, when a movie studio releases a new film, 
along with a computer game based on it, along with products tie-ins, along with 
music written for the movie, etc., usually the film is presented as the &ldquo;base&rdquo; object 
from which other objects are derived. So when George Lucas releases a new Star 
Wars movie, it refers back to the original property &mdash; the original Star Wars 
trilogy. This new movie becomes the &ldquo;base&rdquo; object and all other media objects 
which are released along with refer to this object. Conversely, when computer 
games such as Tomb Rider are re-made into movies, the original computer game 
is presented as the &ldquo;base&rdquo; object.  

While I deduced the principle of variability from more basic principles of 
new media &mdash; numerical representation (1) and modularity of information (2) &mdash; 
it can also be seen as a consequence of computer&rsquo;s way of to represent data and 
model the world itself: as variables rather than constants. As new media theorist 

 

&#xC; 

62

33

and architect Marcos Novak notes, a computer &mdash; and computer culture in its 
wake &mdash; substitute every constant by a variable.
 In designing all functions and 
data structures, a computer programmer tries to always use variables rather than 
constants. On the level of human-computer interface, this principle means that the 
user is given many options to modify the performance of a program of a media 
object, be it a computer game, a Web site, a Web browser, or the operating system 
itself. The user can change the profile of a game character, modify how the 
folders appear on the desktop, how files are displayed, what icons are used, etc. If 
we apply this principle to culture at large, it would mean that every choice 
responsible for giving a cultural object a unique identity can potentially remain 
always open. Size, degree of detail, format, color, shape, interactive trajectory, 
trajectory through space, duration, rhythm, point of view, the presence or absence 
of particular characters, the development of the plot &mdash; to name just a few 
dimensions of cultural objects in different media &mdash; all these can be defined as 
variables, to be freely modified by a user.  

Do we want, or need, such freedom? As the pioneer of interactive 

34

 By passing these choices to the user, the 

filmmaking Graham Weinbren argued in relation to interactive media, making a 
choice involves a moral responsibility.
author also passes the responsibility to represent the world and the human 
condition in it. (This is paralleled by the use of phone or Web-based automated 
menu systems by all big companies to handle their customers; while the 
companies are doing this in the name of &ldquo;choice&rdquo; and &ldquo;freedom,&rdquo; one of the 
effects of this automation is that labor to be done is passed from company&rsquo;s 
employees to the customer. If before a customer would get the information or buy 
the product by interacting with a company employee, now she has to spend her 
own time and energy in navigating through numerous menus to accomplish the 
same result.) The moral anxiety which accompanies the shift from constants to 
variables, from tradition to choices in all areas of life in a contemporary society, 
and the corresponding anxiety of a writer who has to portray it, is well rendered in 
this closing passage of a short story written by a contemporary American writer 
Rick Moody (the story is about the death of his sister):

35

   

 

I should fictionalize it more, I should conceal myself. I should consider the 
responsibilities of characterization, I should conflate her two children into one, or 
reverse their genders, or otherwise alter them, I should make her boyfriend a 
husband, I should explicate all the tributaries of my extended family (its 
remarriages, its internecine politics), I should novelize the whole thing, I should 
make it multigenerational, I should work in my forefathers (stonemasons and 
newspapermen), I should let artifice create an elegant surface, I should make the 
events orderly, I should wait and write about it later, I should wait until I&rsquo;m not 
angry, I shouldn&rsquo;t clutter a narrative with fragments, with mere recollections of 

 

&#xC; 

63

good times, or with regrets, I should make Meredith&rsquo;s death shapely and 
persuasive, not blunt and disjunctive, I shouldn&rsquo;t have to think the unthinkable, I 
shouldn&rsquo;t have to suffer, I should address her here directly (these are the ways I 
miss you), I should write only of affection, I should make our travels in this 
earthy landscape safe and secure, I should have a better ending, I shouldn&rsquo;t say 
her life was short and often sad, I shouldn&rsquo;t say she had demons, as I do too. 

 

 
5. Transcoding 
 
Beginning with the basic, &ldquo;material&rdquo; principles of new media &mdash; numeric coding 
and modular organization &mdash; we moved to more &ldquo;deep&rdquo; and far reaching ones &mdash; 
automation and variability. The last, fifth principle of cultural transcoding aims to 
describe what in my view is the most substantial consequence of  media&rsquo;s 
computerization. As I have suggested, computerization turns media into computer 
data. While from one point of view computerized media still displays structural 
organization which makes sense to its human users &mdash; images feature 
recognizable objects; text files consist from grammatical sentences; virtual spaces 
are defined along the familiar Cartesian coordinate system; and so on &mdash; from 
another point of view, its structure now follows the established conventions of 
computer's organization of data. The examples of these conventions are different 
data structures such as lists, records and arrays; the already mentioned substitution 
of all constants by variables; the separation between algorithms and data 
structures; and modularity.  

The structure of a computer image is a case in point. On the level of 

representation, it belongs to the side of human culture, automatically entering in 
dialog with other images, other cultural &ldquo;semes&rdquo; and &ldquo;mythemes.&rdquo; But on another 
level, it is a computer file which consist from a machine-readable header, 
followed by numbers representing RGB values of its pixels. On this level it enters 
into a dialog with other computer files. The dimensions of this dialog are not the 
image&rsquo;s content, meanings or formal qualities, but file size, file type, type of 
compression used, file format and so on. In short, these dimensions are that of 
computer&rsquo;s own cosmogony rather than of human culture.  

Similarly, new media in general can be thought of as consisting from two 

distinct layers: the &ldquo;cultural layer&rdquo; and the &ldquo;computer layer.&rdquo; The examples of 
categories on the cultural layer are encyclopedia and a short story; story and plot; 
composition and point of view; mimesis and catharsis, comedy and tragedy. The 
examples of categories on the computer layer are process and packet (as in data 
packets transmitted through the network); sorting and matching; function and 
variable; a computer language and a data structure.  

Since new media is created on computers, distributed via computers, 
stored and archived on computers, the logic of a computer can be expected to 

 

&#xC; 

64

significant influence on the traditional cultural logic of media. That is, we may 
expect that the computer layer will affect the cultural layer. The ways in which 
computer models the world, represents data and allows us to operate on it; the key 
operations behind all computer programs (such as search, match, sort, filter); the 
conventions of HCI &mdash; in short, what can be called computer&rsquo;s ontology, 
epistemology and pragmatics  &mdash; influence the cultural layer of new media: its 
organization, its emerging genres, its contents.  

Of course what I called a computer layer is not itself fixed but is changing 
in time. As hardware and software keep evolving and as the computer is used for 
new tasks and in new ways, this layer is undergoing continuos transformation. 
The new use of computer as a media machine is the case in point. This use is 
having an effect on computer&rsquo;s hardware and software, especially on the level of 
the human-computer interface which looks more and more like the interfaces of 
older media machines and cultural technologies: VCR, tape player, photo camera.  

In summary, the computer layer and media/culture layer influence each 
other. To use another concept from new media, we can say that they are being 
composited together. The result of this composite is the new computer culture: a 
blend of human and computer meanings, of traditional ways human culture 
modeled the world and computer&rsquo;s own ways to represent it.  

Throughout the book, we will encounter many examples of the principle 

of transcoding at work. For instance, &ldquo;The Language of Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; 
section will look at how conventions of printed page, cinema and traditional HCI  
interact together in the interfaces of Web sites, CD-ROMs, virtual spaces and 
computer games.   
&ldquo;Database&rdquo; section will discuss how a database, originally a computer technology 
to organize and access data, is becoming a new cultural form of its own. But we 
can also reinterpret some of the principles of new media already discussed above 
as consequences of the transcoding principle. For instance, hypermedia can be 
understood as one cultural effect of the separation between a algorithm and a data 
structure, essential to computer programming. Just as in programming algorithms 
and data structures exist independently of each other, in hypermedia data is 
separated from the navigation structure. (For another example of the cultural 
effect of algorithm&mdash;data structure dichotomy see &ldquo;Database&rdquo; section.) Similarly, 
the modular structure of new media can be seen as an effect of the modularity in 
structural computer programming. Just as a structural computer program consist 
from smaller modules which in their turn consist from even smaller modules, a 
new media object as a modular structure, as I explained in my discussion of 
modularity above. 
 
format. The computerization of culture gradually accomplishes similar 
transcoding in relation to all cultural categories and concepts. That is, cultural 
categories and concepts are substituted, on the level of meaning and/or the 
language, by new ones which derive from computer&rsquo;s ontology, epistemology and 

In new media lingo, to &ldquo;transcode&rdquo; something is to translate it into another 

 

&#xC; 

65

Given the process of &ldquo;conceptual transfer&rdquo; from computer world to culture 

pragmatics. New media thus acts as a forerunner of this more general process of 
cultural re-conceptualization. 
 
at large, and given the new status of media as computer data, what theoretical 
framework can we use to understand it? Since on one level new media is an old 
media which has been digitized, it seems appropriate to look at new media using 
the perspective of media studies. We may compare new media and old media, 
such as print, photography, or television. We may also ask about the conditions of 
distribution and reception and the patterns of use. We may also ask about 
similarities and differences in the material properties of each medium and how 
these affect their aesthetic possibilities.  
This perspective is important, and I am using it frequently in this book; but it is 
not sufficient. It can't address the most fundamental new quality of new media 
which has no historical precedent &mdash; programmability. Comparing new media to 
print, photography, or television will never tell us the whole story. For while from 
one point of view new media is indeed another media, from another is simply a 
particular type of computer data, something which is stored in files and databases, 
retrieved and sorted, run through algorithms and written to the output device. That 
the data represents pixels and that this device happened to be an output screen is 
besides the point. The computer may perform perfectly the role of the Jacquard 
loom, but underneath it is fundamentally Babbage's Analytical Engine - after all, 
this was its identity for one hundred and fifty years. New media may look like 
media, but this is only the surface.  

New media calls for a new stage in media theory whose beginnings can be 
traced back to the revolutionary works of Robert Innis and Marshall McLuhan of 
the 1950s. To understand the logic of new media we need to turn to computer 
science. It is there that we may expect to find the new terms, categories and 
operations which characterize media which became programmable. From media 
studies, we move to something which can be called software studies; from media 
theory &mdash; to software theory. The principle of transcoding is one way to start 
thinking about software theory. Another way which this book experiments with is 
using concepts from computer science as categories of new media theory. The 
examples here are &ldquo;interface&rdquo; and &ldquo;database.&rdquo; And, last but not least, I follow the 
analysis of &ldquo;material&rdquo; and logical principles of computer hardware and software 
in this chapter with two chapters on human-computer interface and the interfaces 
of software applications use to author and access new media objects. 
 
 

 

&#xC; 

66

What New Media is Not 

 
Having proposed a list of the key diffirences between new and old media, I now 
would like to address other potential candidates, which I have ommitted.The 
following are some of the popularly held notions about the difference between 
new and old media which this section will subject to scrutiny:  
 

1.  New media is analog media converted to a digital representation. In 

contrast to analog media which is continuos, digitally encoded media 
is discrete.   

2.  All digital media (text, still images, visual or audio time data, shapes, 
3D spaces) share the same the same digital code. This allows diffirent 
media types to be displayed using one machine, i.e., a computer, which 
acts as a multimedia display device. 

3.  New media allows for random access. In contrast to film or videotape 
which store data sequentially, computer storage devices make possible 
to access any data element equally fast. 

4.  Digitization involves inevitable loss of information. In contrast to an 

analog representation, a digitally encoded representation contains a 
fixed amount of information. 

5.  In contrast to analog media where each successive copy loses quality, 
digitally encoded media can be copied endlessly without degradation.  

6.  New media is interactive. In contrast to traditional media where the 

order of presentation was fixed, the user can now interact with a media 
object. In the process of interaction the user can choose which 
elements to display or which paths to follow, thus generating a unique 
work. Thus the user becomes the co-author of the work.  

 
 
Cinema as New Media 
 
If we place new media new media within a longer historical perspective, we will 
see that many of these principles are not unique to new media and can be already 
found in older media technologies. I will illustrate this by using the example of 
the technology of cinema. 
 
(1). &ldquo;New media is analog media converted to a digital representation. In contrast 
to analog media which is continuos, digitally encoded media is discrete.&rdquo; 

 

Indeed, any digital representation consists from a limited number of 

samples. For example, a digital still image is a matrix of pixels &mdash; a 2D sampling 
of space. However, as I already noted, cinema was already based on sampling &mdash; 
the sampling of time. Cinema sampled time twenty four times a second. So we 

 

&#xC; 

67

Cinema is not the only media technology which, emerging towards the end 

can say that cinema already prepared us for new media. All that remained was to 
take this already discrete representation and to quantify it. But this is simply a 
mechanical step; what cinema accomplished was a much more difficult 
conceptual break from the continuous to the discrete.    
 
of the nineteenth century, employed a discrete representation. If cinema sampled 
time, fax transmission of images, starting in 1907, sampled a 2D space; even 
earlier, first television experiments (Carey, 1875; Nipkow, 1884) already involved 
sampling of both time and space.
earlier than these other technologies, cinema is the first to make the principle of a 
discrete representation of the visual a public knowledge. 

 However, reaching mass popularity much 

36

 

 

(2). &ldquo;All digital media (text, still images, visual or audio time data, shapes, 3D 
spaces) share the same the same digital code. This allows diffirent media types to 
be displayed using one machine, i.e., a computer, which acts as a multimedia 
display device.&rdquo; 

Before computer multimedia became commonplace around 1990, 
filmmakers were already combining moving images, sound and text (be it 
intertitles of the silent era or the title sequences of the later period) for a whole 
century. Cinema thus was the original modern "multimedia." We can also much 
earlier examples of multiple-media displays, such as Medieval illuminated 
manuscripts which combined text, graphics and representational images.    
 
(3). &ldquo;New media allows for random access. In contrast to film or videotape which 
store data sequentially, computer storage devices make possible to access any data 
element equally fast.&rdquo;  
 
 For example, once a film is digitized and loaded in the computer memory, 
any frame can be accessed with equal ease. Therefore, if cinema sampled time but 
still preserved its linear ordering (subsequent moments of time become 
subsequent frames), new media abandons this "human-centered" representation 
altogether &mdash; in order to put represented time fully under human control. Time is 
mapped onto two-dimensional space, where it can be managed, analyzed and 
manipulated more easily.    
 
Such mapping was already widely used in the nineteenth century cinema 
machines. The Phenakisticope, the Zootrope, the Zoopraxiscope, the Tachyscope, 
and Marey's photographic gun were all based on the same principle -- placing a 
number of slightly different images around the perimeter of a circle. Even more 
striking is the case of Thomas Edison's first cinema apparatus. In 1887 Edison and 
his assistant, William Dickson, began experiments to adopt the already proven 
technology of a phonograph record for recording and displaying of motion 
pictures. Using a special picture-recording camera, tiny pinpoint-size photographs 
were placed in spirals on a cylindrical cell similar in size to the phonography 

 

&#xC; 

68

cylinder. A cylinder was to hold 42,000 images, each so small (1/32 inch wide) 
that a viewer would have to look at them through a microscope.
 The storage 
capacity of this medium was twenty-eight minutes -- twenty-eight minutes of 
continuous time taken apart, flattened on a surface and mapped into a two-
dimensional grid. (In short, time was prepared to be manipulated and re-ordered, 
something which was soon to be accomplished by film editors.)  
 

37

The Myth of the Digital 

 

 

Discrete representation, random access, multimedia -- cinema already contained 
these principles. So they cannot help us to separate new media from old media. 
Let us continue interrogating these principles. If many principles of new media 
turn out to be not so new, what about the idea of digital representation? Surely, 
this is the one idea which radically redefines media? The answer is not so strait 
forward. This idea acts as an umbrella for three unrelated concepts: analog-to-
digital conversion (digitization), a common representational code, and numerical 
representation. Whenever we claim that some quality of new media is due to its 
digital status, we need to specify which out of these three concepts is at work. For 
example, the fact that different media can be combined into a single digital file is 
due to the use of a common representational code; whereas the ability to copy 
media without introducing degradation is an effect of numerical representation.  
 
Because of this ambiguity, I try to avoid using the word &ldquo;digital&rdquo; in this 
book. &ldquo;Principles of New Media&rdquo; focused on the concept of numerical 
representation as being the really crucial one out of these three. Numerical 
representation tuns media into computer data thus making it programmable. And 
this indeed radically changes what media is.  

In contrast, as I will show below, the alleged principles of new media 

which are often deduced from the concept of digitization &mdash; that analog-to-digital 
conversion inevitably results in a loss of information and that digital copies are 
identical to the original &mdash; turn out not to hold under closer examination. That is, 
although these principles are indeed logical consequence of digitization, they do 
not apply to concrete computer technologies the way they are currently used.  
 
(4). &ldquo;Digitization involves inevitable loss of information. In contrast to an analog 
representation, a digitally encoded representation contains a fixed amount of 
information.&rdquo; 

In his important study of digital photography The Reconfigured Eye, 
William Mitchell explains this as follows:  "There is an indefinite amount of 
information in a continuous-tone photograph, so enlargement usually reveals 
more detail but yields a fuzzier and grainier picture... A digital image, on the other 
hand, has precisely limited spatial and tonal resolution and contains a fixed 

 

&#xC; 

69

38

 From a logical point of view, this principle is a correct 

But even the pixel-based representation, which appears to be the very 

amount of information."
deduction from the idea of digital representation. A digital image consists of a 
finite number of pixels, each having a distinct color or a tonal value, and this 
number determines the amount of detail an image can represent. Yet in reality this 
difference does not matter. By the end of the 1990s, even cheap consumer 
scanners were capable of scanning images at resolutions of1200 or 2400 pixels 
per inch. So while a digitally stored image is still comprised of a finite number of 
pixels, at such resolution it can contain much finer detail than it was ever possible 
with traditional photography. This nullifies the whole distinction between an 
"indefinite amount of information in a continuous-tone photograph" and a fixed 
amount of detail in a digital image. The more relevant question is how much 
information in an image can be useful to the viewer. By the end of new media 
first decade, technology has already reached the point where a digital image can 
easily contain much more information than anybody would ever want.   
 
essence of digital imaging, cannot be taken for granted. Some computer graphics 
software have bypassed the main limitation of the traditional pixel grid -- fixed 
resolution. Live Picture, an image editing program, converts a pixel-based image 
into a set of mathematical equations. This allows the user to work with an image 
of virtually unlimited resolution. Another paint program Matador makes possible 
painting on a tiny image which may consist of just a few pixels as though it were 
a high-resolution image (it achieves this by breaking each pixel into a number of 
smaller sub-pixels). In both programs, the pixel is no longer a "final frontier"; as 
far as the user is concerned, it simply does not exist. Texture mapping algorithms 
make the notion of a fixed resolution meaningless in a different way. They often 
store the same image at a number of different resolution. During rendering the 
texture map of arbitrary resolution is produced by interpolating between two 
images which are closest to this resolution. (The similar technique is used by 
virtual world software which stores the number of versions of a singular object at 
different degree of detail.) Finally, certain compression techniques eliminate 
pixel-based representation altogether, instead representing an image via different 
mathematical constructs (such as transforms.)   
 
(5). &#x93;&ldquo;In contrast to analog media where each successive copy loses quality, 
digitally encoded media can be copied endlessly without degradation.&#x94;&rdquo; 

Mitchell summarizes this as follows: "The continuous spatial and tonal 
variation of analog pictures is not exactly replicable, so such images cannot be 
transmitted or copied without degradation... But discrete states can be replicated 
precisely, so a digital image that is a thousand generations away from the original 
is indistinguishable in quality from any one of its progenitors."
digital culture, "an image file can be copied endlessly, and the copy is 

 Therefore, in 

39

 

&#xC; 

70

40

 

One may argue that this situation is temporary and once cheaper computer 

distinguishable from the original by its date since there is no loss of quality."
This is all true -- in principle. However, in reality, there is actually much more 
degradation and loss of information between copies of digital images than 
between copies of traditional photographs. A single digital image consists of 
millions of pixels. All of this data requires considerable storage space in a 
computer; it also takes a long time (in contrast to a text file) to transmit over a 
network. Because of this, the software and hardware used to acquire, store, 
manipulate, and transmit digital images uniformly rely on lossy compression -- 
the technique of making image files smaller by deleting some information. The 
example of lossy compression technique is JPEG format used to store still images 
and MPEG, used to store digital video on DVD. The technique involves a 
compromise between image quality and file size -- the smaller the size of a 
compressed file, the more visible are the visual artifacts introduced in deleting 
information. Depending on the level of compression, these artifacts range from 
barely noticeable to quite pronounced.  
 
storage and faster networks become commonplace, lossy compression will 
disappear. However, presently the trend is quite the reverse with lossy 
compression becoming more and more the norm for representing visual 
information. If a single digital image already contains a lot of data, this amount 
increases dramatically if we want to produce and distribute moving images in a 
digital form (one second of video, for instance, consists of 30 still images). Digital 
television with its hundreds of channels and video on-demand services, the 
distribution of full-length films on DVD or over Internet, fully digital post-
production of feature films -- all of these developments are made possible by 
lossy compression. It will be a number of years before the advances in storage 
media and communication bandwidth will eliminate the need to compress audio-
visual data. So rather than being an aberration, a flaw in the otherwise pure and 
perfect world of the digital, where even a single bit of information is never lost, 
lossy compression is the very foundation of computer culture, at least for now. 
Therefore, while in theory computer technology entails the flawless replication of 
data, its actual use in contemporary society is characterized by the loss of data, 
degradation, and noise; the noise which is often even stronger than that of 
traditional analog media. 
  
 
The Myth of Interactivity 
 
We have only one principle still remaining from the original list: interactivity. As 
with &ldquo;digital,&rdquo; I avoid using the word &ldquo;interactive&rdquo; in this book without qualifying 
it,. for the same reason -- I find the concept to be too broad to be truly useful.  

 

&#xC; 

71

Rather than evoking this concept by itself, in this book I use a number of 

Used in relation to computer-based media, the concept of interactivity is a 

 
tautology. Modern human-computer interface (HCI) is by its very definition 
interactive. In contrast to earlier interfaces such as batch processing, modern HCI 
allows the user to control the computer in real-time by manipulating information 
displayed on the screen. Once an object is represented in a computer, it 
automatically becomes interactive. Therefore, to call computer media interactive 
is meaningless -- it simply means stating the most basic fact about computers. 
 
other concepts, such as menu-based interactivity, salability, simulation, image-
interface, and image-instrument, to describe different kinds of interactive 
structures and operations. The already used distinction between &ldquo;closed&rdquo; and 
&ldquo;open&rdquo; interactivity is just one example of this approach. 
 
new media object, it is much more difficult to theoretically deal with user 
experiences of these structures. This remains to be one of the most difficult 
theoretical questions raised by new media. Without pretending to have a complete 
answer, I would like to address some aspects of this question here. 

While it is relatively easy to specify different interactive structures used in 

41

 Theater, painting and cinema also relied on the techniques of 

Modern media and art pushed each of these techniques further, putting 

All classical, and even more so modern art, was already "interactive" in a 
number of ways. Ellipses in literary narration, missing details of objects in visual 
art and other representational "shortcuts" required the user to fill-in the missing 
information.
staging, composition and cinematography to orchestrate viewer's attention over 
time, requiring her to focus on different parts of the display. With sculpture and 
architecture, the viewer had to move her whole body to experience the spatial 
structure. 
 
new cognitive and physical demands on the viewer. Beginning in the 1920s new 
narrative techniques such as film montage forced the audiences to quickly bridge 
mental gaps between unrelated images. New representational style of semi-
abstraction which, along with photography, became the &ldquo;international style&rdquo; of 
modern visual culture, required the viewer to reconstruct the represented objects 
from the bare minimum -- a contour, few patches of color, shadows cast by the 
objects not represented directly. Finally, in the 1960s, continuing where Futurism 
and Dada left of, new forms of art such as happenings, performance and 
installation turned art explicitly participational. This, according to some new 
media theorists, prepared the ground for interactive computer installations which 
appeared in the 1980s.
 
computer-based media, there is danger that we interpret "interaction" literally, 
equating it with physical interaction between a user and a media object (pressing a 
button, choosing a link, moving the body), at the sake of psychological 
interaction. The psychological processes of filling-in, hypothesis forming, recall 

When we use the concept of  &ldquo;interactive media&rdquo; exclusively in relation to 

42

  

 

&#xC; 

72

44

 

 
This mistake is not new; on the contrary, it is a structural feature of history 

and identification, which are required for us to comprehend any text or image at 
all, are mistakenly identified with an objectively existing structure of interactive 
links.
 
of modern media. The literal interpretation of interactivity is just the latest 
example of a larger modern trend to externalize of mental life, the process in 
which media technologies -- photography, film, VR -- have played a key role.
Beginning in the nineteenth century, we witness recurrent claims by the users and 
theorists of new media technologies, from Francis Galton (the inventor of 
composite photography in the 1870s) to Hugo Munsterberg, Sergei Eisenstein 
and, recently, Jaron Lanier, that these technologies externalize and objectify the 
mind. Galton not only claimed that "the ideal faces obtained by the method of 
composite portraiture appear to have a great deal in common with...so-called 
abstract ideas" but in fact he proposed to rename abstract ideas "cumulative 
ideas."
 According to M&uuml;nsterberg, who was a Professor of Psychology at 
Harvard University and an author of one of the earliest theoretical treatments of 
cinema entitled The Film: A Psychological Study (1916), the essence of films lies 
in its ability to reproduce, or "objectify" various mental functions on the screen: 
"The photoplay obeys the laws of the mind rather than those of the outer 
world."
externalize &mdash; and control &mdash; thinking. As an experiment in this direction, he 
boldly conceived a screen adaptation of Marx's Capital. "The content of 
CAPITAL (its aim) is now formulated: to teach the worker to think dialectically," 
Eisenstein writes enthusiastically in April of 1928.
principles of "Marxist dialectics" as canonized by the official Soviet philosophy, 
Eisenstein planned to present the viewer with the visual equivalents of thesis and 
anti-thesis so that the viewer can then proceed to arrive at synthesis, i.e. the 
correct conclusion, pre-programmed by Eisenstein.  
 
technology as capable of completely objectifying, better yet, transparently 
merging with mental processes. His descriptions of its capabilities did not 
distinguish between internal mental functions, events and processes, and 
externally presented images. This is how, according to Lanier, VR can take over 
human memory: "You can play back your memory through time and classify your 
memories in various ways. You'd be able to run back through the experiential 
places you've been in order to be able to find people, tools."
that VR will lead to the age of "post-symbolic communication," communication 
without language or any other symbols. Indeed, why should there be any need for 
linguistic symbols, if everybody, rather than being locked into a "prison-house of 
language" (Fredric Jameson

 In the 1920s Eisenstein was speculating about how film can be used to 

In the 1980s, Jaron Lanier, a California guru of VR, similarly saw VR 

), will happily live in the ultimate nightmare of 

48

 Lanier also claimed 

47

 In accordance with the 

49

43

45

46

 

&#xC; 

73

50

51 

The recurrent claims that new media technologies externalize and 

democracy -- the single mental space which is shared by everybody, and where 
every communicative act is always ideal (Jurgen Habermas
). This is Lanier's 
example of how post-symbolic communication will function: "you can make a 
cup that someone else can pick when there wasn't a cup before, without having to 
use a picture of the word "cup."
Here, as with the earlier technology of film, the 
fantasy of objectifying and augmenting consciousness, extending the powers of 
reason, goes hand in hand with the desire to see in technology a return to the 
primitive happy age of pre-language, pre-misunderstanding. Locked in virtual 
reality caves, with language taken away, we will communicate through gestures, 
body movements, and grimaces, like our primitive ancestors... 
 
objectify reasoning, and that they can be used to augment or control it, are based 
on the assumption of the isomorphism of mental representations and operations 
with external visual effects such as dissolves, composite images, and edited 
sequences. This assumption is shared not just by modern media inventors, artists 
and critics but also by modern psychologists. Modern psychological theories of 
the mind, from Freud to cognitive psychology, repeatedly equate mental processes 
with external, technologically generated visual forms. Thus Freud in The 
Interpretation of Dreams (1900) compared the process of condensation with one 
of Francis Galton's procedures which became especially famous: making family 
portraits by overlaying a different negative image for each member of the family 
and then making a single print.
psychologist Edward Titchener opened the discussion of the nature of abstract 
ideas in his textbook of psychology by noting that "the suggestion has been made 
that an abstract idea is a sort of composite photograph, a mental picture which 
results from the superimposition of many particular perceptions or ideas, and 
which therefore shows the common elements distinct and the individual elements 
blurred."
should not wonder why Titchener, Freud and other psychologists take the 
comparison for granted rather than presenting it as a simple metaphor -- 
contemporary cognitive psychologists also do not question why their models of 
the mind are so similar to the computer workstations on which they are 
constructed. The linguist George Lakoff asserted that "natural reasoning makes 
use of at least some unconscious and automatic image-based processes such as 
superimposing images, scanning them, focusing on part of them"
  while the 
psychologist  Philip Johnson-Laird proposed that logical reasoning is a matter of 
scanning visual models.
 Such notions would have been impossible before the 
emergence of television and computer graphics. These visual technologies made 
operations on images such as scanning, focusing, and superimposition seem 
natural. 

 He then proceeds to consider the pros and cons of this view. We 

52

 Writing in the same decade, the American 

55

54

53

 

&#xC; 

74

What to make of this modern desire to externalize the mind? It can be 

related to the demand of modern mass society for standardization. The subjects 
have to be standardized, and the means by which they are standardized need to be 
standardized as well. Hence the objectification of internal, private mental 
processes, and their equation with external visual forms which can be easily 
manipulated, mass produced, and standardized on its own. The private and 
individual is translated into the public and becomes regulated.  

What before was a mental process, a uniquely individual state, now 

became part of a public sphere. Unobservable and interior processes and 
representations were taken out of individual heads and put outside -- as drawings, 
photographs and other visual forms. Now they could be discussed in public, 
employed in teaching and propaganda, standardized, and mass-distributed. What 
was private became public. What was unique became mass-produced. What was 
hidden in an individual's mind became shared. 

Interactive computer media perfectly fits this trend to externalize and 

objectify mind&rsquo;s operations. The very principle of hyperlinking, which forms the 
basis of much of interactive media, objectifies the process of association often 
taken to be central to human thinking. Mental processes of reflection, problem 
solving, recall and association are externalized, equated with following a link, 
moving to a new page, choosing a new image, or a new scene. Before we would 
look at an image and mentally follow our own private associations to other 
images. Now interactive computer media asks us instead to click on an image in 
order to go to another image. Before we would read a sentence of a story or a line 
of a poem and think of other lines, images, memories. Now interactive media asks 
us to click on a highlighted sentences to go to another sentence. In short, we are 
asked to follow pre-programmed, objectively existing associations. Put 
diffidently, in what can be read as a new updated version of French philosopher 
Louis Althusser's concept of "interpellation," we are asked to mistake the 
structure of somebody's else mind for our own.
 
This is a new kind of identification appropriate for the information age of 
cognitive labor. The cultural technologies of an industrial society -- cinema and 
fashion -- asked us to identify with somebody's bodily image. The interactive 
media asks us to identify with somebody's else mental structure. If a cinema 
viewer, both male and female was lasting after and trying to emulate the body of 
movie star, a computer user is asked to follow the mental trajectory of a new 
media designer.  

56

 

 

&#xC; 

75

 

II. The Interface 

 
In 1984 the director of Blade Runner Ridley Scott was hired to create a 
commercial which introduced Apple Computer&rsquo;s new Macintosh. In retrospect, 
this event is full of historical significance. Released within two years of each 
other, Blade Runner (1982) and Macintosh computer (1984) defined the two 
aesthetics which, twenty years, still rule contemporary culture. One was a 
futuristic dystopia which combined futurism and decay, computer technology and 
fetishism, retro-styling and urbanism, Los Angeles and Tokyo. Since Blade 
Runner release, its techno-noir was replayed in countless films, computer games, 
novels and other cultural objects. And while a number of strong aesthetic systems 
have been articulated in the following decades, both by individual artists (Mathew 
Barney, Mariko Mori) and by commercial culture at large (the 1980s &ldquo;post-
modern&rdquo; pastiche, the 1990s techno-minimalism), none of them was able to 
challenge the hold of Blade Runner on our vision of the future. 
 
In contrast to the dark, decayed, &ldquo;post-modern&rdquo; vision of Blade Runner, 
Graphical User Interface (GUI), popularized by Macintosh, remained true to the 
modernist values of clarity and functionality. The user&rsquo;s screen was ruled by strait 
lines and rectangular windows which contained smaller rectangles of individual 
files arranged in a grid. The computer communicated with the user via rectangular 
boxes containing clean black type rendered again white background. Subsequent 
versions of GUI added colors and made possible for users to customize the 
appearance of many interface elements, thus somewhat deluding the sterility and 
boldness of the original monochrome 1984 version. Yet its original aesthetic 
survived in the displays of hand-held communicators such as Palm Pilot, cellular 
telephones, car navigation systems and other consumer electronic products which 
use small LCD displays comparable in quality to 1984 Macintosh screen.   
 
although a very different one. In this vision, the lines between human and is 
technological creations (computers, androids) are clearly drawn and decay is not 
tolerated. In computer, once a file is created, it never disappears except when 
explicitly deleted by the user. And even then deleted items can be usually 
recovered. Thus if in &ldquo;meatspace&rdquo; we have to work to remember, in cyberspace 
we have to work to forget. (Of course while they run, OS and applications 
constantly create, write to and erase various temporary files, as well as swap data 
between RAM and virtual memory files on a hard drive, but most of this activity 
remains invisible to the user.)  

Like Blade Runner, Macintosh&rsquo;s GUI articulated a vision of the future, 

Also like Blade Runner, GUI vision also came to influence many other 

areas of culture. This influence ranges from purely graphical (for instance, use of 
GUI elements by print and TV designers) to more conceptual. In the 1990s, as the 
Internet progressively grew in popularity, the role of a digital computer shifted 

 

&#xC; 

76

57

 

58

In semiotic terms, the computer interface acts as a code which carries 

from being a particular technology (a calculator, a symbol processor, an image 
manipulator, etc.) to being a filter to all culture, a form through which all kinds of 
cultural and artistic production is being mediated. As a window of a Web browser 
comes to replace cinema and television screen, a wall in art gallery, a library and 
a book, all at once, the new situation manifest itself: all culture, past and present, 
is being filtered through a computer, with its particular human-computer 
interface.
 
cultural messages in a variety of media. When you use the Internet, everything 
you access &mdash; texts, music, video, navigable spaces &mdash; passes through the 
interface of the browser and then, in its turn, the interface of the OS. In cultural 
communication, a code is rarely simply a neutral transport mechanism; usually it 
affects the messages transmitted with its help. For instance, it may make some 
messages easy to conceive and render others unthinkable. A code may also 
provide its own model of the world, its own logical system, or ideology; 
subsequent cultural messages or whole languages created using this code will be 
limited by this model, system or ideology. Most modern cultural theories rely on 
these notions which I will refer to together as &ldquo;non-transparency of the code&rdquo; 
idea. For instance, according to Whorf-Sapir hypothesis which enjoyed popularity 
in the middle of the twentieth century, human thinking is determined by the code 
of natural language; the speakers of different natural languages perceive and think 
about world differently.
 Whorf-Sapir hypothesis is an extreme expression of 
&ldquo;non-transparency of the code&rdquo; idea; usually it is formulated in a less extreme 
form. But then we think about the case of human-computer interface, applying a 
&ldquo;strong&rdquo; version of this idea makes sense. The interface shapes how the computer 
user conceives the computer itself. It also determines how users think of any 
media object accessed via a computer. Stripping different media of their original 
distinctions, the interface imposes its own logic on them. Finally, by organizing 
computer data in particular ways, the interface provides distinct models of the 
world. For instance, a hierarchical file system assumes that the world can be 
organized in a logical multi-level hierarchy. In contrast, a hypertext model of the 
World Wide Web models the world as a non-hierarchical system ruled by 
metonymy. In short, far from being a transparent window into the data inside a 
computer, the interface bring with it strong messages of its own.  
 
consider &ldquo;cut and paste&rdquo; operation, standard in all software running under modern 
GUI. This operation renders insignificant the traditional distinction between 
spatial and temporal media, since the user can cut and paste parts of images, 
regions of space and parts of a temporal composition in exactly the same way. It 
is also &ldquo;blind&rdquo; to traditional distinctions in scale: the user can cut and paste a 
single pixel, an image, a whole digital movie in the same way. And last, this 
operation also renders insignificant traditional distinctions between media: &ldquo;cut 

As an example of how the interface imposes its own logic on media, 

 

&#xC; 

77

and paste&rdquo; can be applied to texts, still and moving images, sounds and 3D objects 
in the same way. 

The interface comes to play a crucial role in information society yet in a 

another way. In this society, not only work and leisure activities increasingly 
involve computer use, but they also converge around the same interfaces. Both 
&#x93;&ldquo;work&#x94;&rdquo; applications (word processors, spreadsheet programs, database programs) 
and &#x93;&ldquo;leisure&#x94;&rdquo; applications (computer games, informational DVD) use the same 
tools and metaphors of GUI. The best example of this convergence is a Web 
browser employed both in the office and at home, both for work and for play. In 
this respect information society is quite different from industrial society, with its 
clear separation between the field of work and the field of leisure. In the 
nineteenth century Karl Marx imagined that a future communist state would 
overcome this work-leisure divide as well as the highly specialized and piece-
meal character of modern work itself. Marx's ideal citizen would be cutting wood 
in the morning, gardening in the afternoon and composing music in the evening. 
Now a subject of information society is engaged in even more activities during a 
typical day: inputting and analyzing data, running simulations, searching the 
Internet, playing computer games, watching streaming video, listening to music 
online, trading stocks, and so on. Yet in performing all these different activities 
the user in essence is always using the same few tools and commands: a computer 
screen and a mouse; a Web browser; a search engine; cut, paste, copy, delete and 
find commands. (In the introduction to &#x93;&ldquo;Forms&#x94;&rdquo; chapter I will discuss how the 
two key new forms of new media &#x97;&mdash; database and navigable space &#x97;&mdash; can be also 
understood in relation to work--leisure opposition.)  

If human-computer interface become a key semiotic code of the 

information society as well as its meta-tool, how does this affect the functioning 
of cultural objects in general and art objects in particular? As I already noted 
(&ldquo;Principles of New Media,&rdquo; 4.2), in computer culture it becomes common to 
construct the number of different interfaces to the same &ldquo;content.&rdquo; For instance, 
the same data can be represented as a 2D graph or as an interactive navigable 
space. Or, a Web site may guide the user to different versions of the site 
depending on the bandwidth of her Internet connection. (I will elaborate on this in 
&ldquo;Database&rdquo; section where a new media object will be defined as one or more 
interfaces to a multimedia database.) Given these examples, we may be tempted 
to think of a new media artwork as also having two separate levels: content and 
interface. Thus the old dichotomies content &mdash; form and content &mdash; medium can 
be re-written as content &mdash; interface. But postulating such an opposition assumes 
that artwork&rsquo;s content is independent of its medium (in an art historical sense) or 
its code (in a semiotic sense). Situated in some idealized medium-free realm, 
content is assumed to exist before its material expression. These assumptions are 
correct in the case of visualization of quantified data; they also apply to classical 
art with its well-defined iconographic motives  and representational conventions. 

 

&#xC; 

78

But just as modern thinkers, from Whorf to Derrida, insisted on &ldquo;non-
transparency of a code&rdquo; idea, modern artists assumed that content and form can&rsquo;t 
be separated. In fact, from the 1910s &ldquo;abstraction&rdquo; to the 1960s &ldquo;process," artists 
keep inventing concepts and procedures to assure that they can&rsquo;t paint some pre-
existent content.   

This leaves us with an interesting paradox. Many new media artworks 

have what can be called &ldquo;an informational dimension,&rdquo; the condition which they 
share with all new media objects. Their experience includes retrieving, looking at 
and thinking about quantified data. Therefore when we refer to such artworks we 
are justified in separating the levels of content and interface. At the same time, 
new media artworks have more traditional &ldquo;experiential&rdquo; or aesthetic dimensions, 
which justifies their status as art rather than as information design. These 
dimensions include a particular configuration of space, time, and surface 
articulated in the work; a particular sequence of user&rsquo;s activities over time to 
interact with the work; a particular formal, material and phenomenological user 
experience. And it is the work&rsquo;s interface that creates its unique materiality and 
the unique user experience. To change the interface even slightly is to 
dramatically change the work. From this perspective, to think of an interface as a 
separate level, as something that can be arbitrary varied is to eliminate the status 
of a new media artwork as art.   

There is another way to think about the difference between new media 
design and new media art in relation to the content &mdash; interface dichotomy. In 
contrast to design, in art the connection between content and form (or, in the case 
of new media, content and interface) is motivated. That is, the choice of a 
particular interface is motivated by work&rsquo;s content to such degree that it can no 
longer be thought of as a separate level. Content and interface merge into one 
entity, and no longer can be taken apart. 

Finally, the idea of content pre-existing the interface is challenged in yet 

another way by new media artworks which dynamically generate their data in real 
time. While in a menu-based interactive multimedia application or a static Web 
site all data already exists before the user accesses it, in dynamic new media 
artworks the data is created on the fly, or, to use the new media lingo, at run time. 
This can be accomplished in a variety of ways: procedural computer graphics, 
formal language systems, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Artificial Life (AL) 
programming. All these methods share the same principle: a programmer setups 
some initial conditions, rules or procedures which control the computer program 
generating the data. For the purposes of the present discussion, the most 
interesting of these approaches are AL and the evolution paradigm. In AL 
approach, the interaction between a number of simple objects at run time leads to 
the emergence of complex global behaviors. These behaviors can only be 
obtained in the course of running the computer program; they can&rsquo;t be predicted 
beforehand. The evolution paradigm applies the metaphor of the evolution theory 
to the generation of images, shapes, animations and other media data. The initial 

 

&#xC; 

79

data supplied by the programmer acts as a genotype which is expanded into a full 
phenotype by a computer. In either case, the content of an artwork is the result of 
a collaboration between the artist/programmer and the computer program, or, if 
the work is interactive, between the artist, the computer program and the user. 
New media artists who most systematically explored AL approach is the team of 
Christa Sommerer and Laurent Mignonneau. In their installation "Life Spacies&rdquo; 
virtual organisms appear and evolve in response to the position, movement and 
interactions of the visitors. Artist/programmer Karl Sims made the key 
contribution to applying the evolution paradigm to media generation. In his 
installation &ldquo;Galapagos&rdquo; the computer programs generates twelfth different virtual 
organisms at every iteration; the visitors select an organism which will continue to 
 The commercial products which use AL 
leave, copulate, mutate and reproduce.
and evolution approaches are computer games such as Creatures series 
(Mindscape Entertainment) and &rdquo;virtual pet&rdquo; toys such as Tamagochi. 

59

In organizing this book I wanted to highlight the importance of the 
interface category by placing its discussion right in the beginning. The two 
sections of this chapter present the examples of different issues raised this 
category -- but they in no way exhaust it. In &#x93;&ldquo;The Language of Cultural Interface&#x94;&rdquo; 
I introduce the term &#x93;&ldquo;cultural interfaces&#x94;&rdquo; to describe interfaces used by stand-
alone hypermedia (CD-ROM and DVD titles), Web sites, computer games and 
other cultural objects distributed via a computer. I think we need such a term 
because as  the role of a computer is shifting from being a tool to a universal 
media machine, we are increasingly "interfacing" to predominantly cultural data: 
texts, photographs, films, music, multimedia documents, virtual environments. 
Therefore, human-computer interface is being supplemented by human-computer-
culture interface, which I abbreviate as &#x93;&ldquo;cultural interface.&#x94;&rdquo; The section then 
discusses the how the three cultural forms -- cinema, the printed word, and a 
general-purpose human-computer interface &#x97;&mdash; contributed to shaping the 
appearance and functionality of cultural interfaces during the 1990s. 
 
of the modern interface &mdash; the computer screen. As in the first section, I am 
interested in analyzing continuities between a computer interface and older 
cultural forms, languages and conventions. The section positions the computer 
screen within a longer historical tradition and it traces different stages in the 
development of this tradition: the static illusionistic image of Renaissance 
painting; the moving image of film screen, the real-time image of radar and 
television; and real-time interactive image of a computer screen.  

The second section &ldquo;The Screen and the User&rdquo; discusses the key element 

 

&#xC; 

80

 

The Language of Cultural Interfaces  

   
 
Cultural Interfaces 
 
The term human-computer interface (HCI) describes the ways in which the user 
interacts with a computer. HCI includes physical input and output devices such a 
monitor, a keyboard, and a mouse. It also consists of metaphors used to 
conceptualize the organization of computer data. For instance, the Macintosh 
interface introduced by Apple in 1984 uses the metaphor of files and folders 
arranged on a desktop. Finally, HCI also includes ways of manipulating this data, 
i.e. a grammar of meaningful actions which the user can perform on it. The 
example of actions provided by modern HCI are copy, rename and delete file; list 
the contents of a directory; start and stop a computer program; set computer&rsquo;s date 
and time.    
 
The term HCI was coined when computer was mostly used as a tool for 
work. However, during the 1990s, the identity of computer has changed. In the 
beginning of the decade, a computer was still largely thought of as a simulation of 
a typewriter, a paintbrush or a drafting ruler -- in other words, as a tool used to 
produce cultural content which, once created, will be stored and distributed in its 
appropriate media: printed page, film, photographic print, electronic recording. 
By the end of the decade, as Internet use became commonplace, the computer's 
public image was no longer that of tool but also that a universal media machine, 
used not only to author, but also to store, distribute and access all media.  
 
increasingly &ldquo;interfacing&rdquo; to predominantly cultural data: texts, photographs, 
films, music, virtual environments. In short, we are no longer interfacing to a 
computer but to culture encoded in digital form. I will use the term "cultural 
interfaces" to describe human-computer-culture interface: the ways in which 
computers present and allows us to interact with cultural data. Cultural interfaces 
include the interfaces used by the designers of Web sites, CD-ROM and DVD 
titles, multimedia encyclopedias, online museums and magazines, computer 
games and other new media cultural objects.  
 
the second part of the 1990s, say 1997, go back in time and click to a random 
Web page. You are likely to see something which graphically resembles a 
magazine layout from the same decade. The page is dominated by text: headlines, 
hyperlinks, blocks of copy. Within this text are few media elements: graphics, 
photographs, perhaps a QuickTime movie and a VRML scene. The page also 
includes radio buttons and a pull-down menu which allows you to choose an item 
from the list. Finally there is a search engine: type a word or a phrase, hit the 

If you need to remind yourself what a typical cultural interface looked in 

As distribution of all forms of culture becomes computer-based, we are 

 

&#xC; 

81

For another example of a prototypical cultural interface of the 1990s, you 

search button and the computer will scan through a file or a database trying to 
match your entry.    
 
may load (assuming it would still run on your computer) the most well-known 
CD-ROM of the 1990s  &mdash; Myst (Broderbund, 1993). Its opening clearly recalls a 
movie: credits slowly scroll across the screen, accompanied by a movie-like 
soundtrack to set the mood. Next, the computer screen shows a book open in the 
middle, waiting for your mouse click. Next, an element of a familiar Macintosh 
interface makes an appearance, reminding you that along with being a new 
movie/book hybrid, Myst is also a computer application: you can adjust sound 
volume and graphics quality by selecting from a usual Macintosh-style menu in 
the upper top part of the screen. Finally, you are taken inside the game, where the 
interplay between the printed word and cinema continue. A virtual camera frames 
images of an island which dissolve between each other. At the same time, you 
keep encountering books and letters, which take over the screen, providing with 
you with clues on how to progress in the game.         
 
stored in a computer, there are numerous ways in which it could be presented to a 
user. Yet, as it always happens with cultural languages, only a few of these 
possibilities actually appear viable in a given historical moment. Just as early 
fifteenth century Italian painters could only conceive of painting in a very 
particular way &mdash; quite different from, say, sixteenth century Dutch painters &mdash; 
today's digital designers and artists use a small set of action grammars and 
metaphors out of a much larger set of all possibilities.    
 
Why do cultural interfaces &mdash; Web pages, CD-ROM titles, computer 
games &mdash; look the way they do? Why do designers organize computer data in 
certain ways and not in others? Why do they employ some interface metaphors 
and not others? 
 
from the elements of other, already familiar cultural forms. In the following I will 
explore the contributions of three such forms to this language during its first 
decades -- the 1990s. The three forms which I will focus make their appearance in 
the opening sequence of the already discussed prototypical new media object of 
the 1990s &mdash; Myst. Its opening activates them before our eyes, one by one. The 
first form is cinema. The second form is the printed word. The third form is a 
general-purpose human-computer interface (HCI).  
 
As it should become clear from the following, I use words "cinema" and 
"printed word" as shortcuts. They stand not for particular objects, such as a film 
or a novel, but rather for larger cultural traditions (we can also use such words as 
cultural forms, mechanisms, languages or media). "Cinema" thus includes mobile 
camera, representation of space, editing techniques, narrative conventions, 
activity of a spectator -- in short, different elements of cinematic perception, 
language and reception. Their presence is not limited to the twentieth-century 

Given that computer media is simply a set of characters and numbers 

My theory is that the language of cultural interfaces is largely made up 

 

&#xC; 

82

60

institution of fiction films, they can be already found in panoramas, magic lantern 
slides, theater and other nineteenth-century cultural forms; similarly, since the 
middle of the twentieth century, they are present not only in films but also in 
television and video programs.  In the case of the "printed word" I am also 
referring to a set of conventions which have developed over many centuries (some 
even before the invention of print) and which today are shared by numerous forms 
of printed matter, from magazines to instruction manuals: a rectangular page 
containing one or more columns of text; illustrations or other graphics framed by 
the text; pages which follow each sequentially; a table of contents and index.   
 
Modern human-computer interface has a much shorter history than the 
printed word or cinema -- but it is still a history. Its principles such as direct 
manipulation of objects on the screen, overlapping windows, iconic 
representation, and dynamic menus were gradually developed over a few decades, 
from the early 1950s to the early 1980s, when they finally appeared in 
commercial systems such as Xerox Star (1981), the Apple Lisa (1982), and most 
importantly the Apple Macintosh (1984).
 Since than, they have become an 
accepted convention for operating a computer, and a cultural language in their 
own right. 
 
Cinema, the printed word and human-computer interface: each of these 
traditions has developed its own unique ways of how information is organized, 
how it is presented to the user, how space and time are correlated with each other, 
how human experience is being structured in the process of accessing 
information. Pages of text and a table of contents; 3D spaces framed by a 
rectangular frame which can be navigated using a mobile point of view; 
hierarchical menus, variables, parameters, copy/paste and search/replace 
operations -- these and other elements of these three traditions are shaping cultural 
interfaces today. Cinema, the printed word and HCI: they are the three main 
reservoirs of metaphors and strategies for organizing information which feed 
cultural interfaces.  
 
them as occupying the same conceptual plane has an additional advantage -- a 
theoretical bonus. It is only natural to think of them as belonging to two different 
kind of cultural species, so to speak. If HCI is a general purpose tool which can be 
used to manipulate any kind of data, both the printed word and cinema are less 
general. They offer ways to organize particular types of data: text in the case of 
print, audio-visual narrative taking place in a 3D space in the case of cinema. HCI 
is a system of controls to operate a machine; the printed word and cinema are 
cultural traditions, distinct ways to record human memory and human experience, 
mechanisms for cultural and social exchange of information. Bringing HCI, the 
printed word and cinema together allows us to see that the three have more in 
common than we may anticipate at first. On the one hand, being a part of our 
culture now for half a century, HCI already represents a powerful cultural 

Bringing cinema, the printed word and HCI interface together and treating 

 

&#xC; 

83

tradition, a cultural language offering its own ways to represent human memory 
and human experience. This language speaks in the form of discrete objects 
organized in hierarchies (hierarchical file system), or as catalogs (databases), or as 
objects linked together through hyperlinks (hypermedia). On the other hand, we 
begin to see that the printed word and cinema also can be thought of as interfaces, 
even though historically they have been tied to particular kinds of data. Each has 
its own grammar of actions, each comes with its own metaphors, each offers a 
particular physical interface. A book or a magazine is a solid object consisting 
from separate pages; the actions include going from page to page linearly, 
marking individual pages and using table of contexts. In the case of cinema, its 
physical interface is a particular architectural arrangement of a movie theater; its 
metaphor is a window opening up into a virtual 3D space.  
Today, as media is being "liberated" from its traditional physical storage 
 
media &mdash; paper, film, stone, glass, magnetic tape &mdash; the elements of printed word 
interface and cinema interface, which previously were hardwired to the content, 
become "liberated" as well. A digital designer can freely mix pages and virtual 
cameras, table of contents and screens, bookmarks and points of view. No longer 
embedded within particular texts and films, these organizational strategies are 
now free floating in our culture, available for use in new contexts. In this respect, 
printed word and cinema have indeed became interfaces --  rich sets of metaphors, 
ways of navigating through content, ways of accessing and storing data. For a 
computer user, both conceptually and psychologically, their elements exist on the 
same plane as radio buttons, pull-down menus, command line calls and other 
elements of standard human-computer interface. 

Let us now discuss some of the elements of these three cultural traditions -
- cinema, the printed word and HCI -- to see how they have shaped the language 
of cultural interfaces.   
 
 
Printed Word 
 
In the 1980's, as PCs and word processing software became commonplace, text 
became the first cultural media to be subjected to digitization in a massive way. 
But already in the 1960's, two and a half decades before the concept of digital 
media was born, researchers were thinking about having the sum total of human 
written production -- books, encyclopedias, technical articles, works of fiction and 
so on -- available online (Ted Nelson's Xanadu project
 
computer culture. On the one hand, it is one media type among others. But, on the 
other hand, it is a meta-language of computer media, a code in which all other 
media are represented: coordinates of 3D objects, pixel values of digital images, 
the formatting of a page in HTML. It is also the primary means of communication 

Text is unique among other media types. It plays a privileged role in 

61

).  

 

&#xC; 

84

62

 

Cultural interfaces rely on our familiarity with the "page interface" while 

between a computer and a user: one types single line commands or runs computer 
programs written in a subset of English; the other responds by displaying error 
codes or text messages.
 
If a computer uses text as its meta-language, cultural interfaces in their 
turn inherit the principles of text organization developed by human civilization 
throughout its existence. One of these is a page: a rectangular surface containing a 
limited amount of information, designed to be accessed in some order, and having 
a particular relationship to other pages. In its modern form, the page is born in the 
first centuries of the Christian era when the clay tablets and papyrus rolls are 
replaced by a codex &mdash; the collection of written pages stitched together on one 
side.   
 
also trying to stretch its definition to include new concepts made possible by a 
computer. In 1984, Apple introduced a graphical user interface which presented 
information in overlapping windows stacked behind one another &mdash; essentially, a 
set of book pages. The user was given the ability to go back and forth between 
these pages, as well as to scroll through individual pages. In this way, a traditional 
page was redefined as a virtual page, a surface which can be much larger than the 
limited surface of a computer screen. In 1987, Apple shipped popular Hypercard 
program which extended the page concept in new ways. Now the users were able 
to include multimedia elements within the pages, as well as to establish links 
between pages regardless of their ordering. A few years later, designers of HTML 
stretched the concept of a page even more by enabling the creation of distributed 
documents, where different parts of a document are located on different 
computers connected through the network. With this development, a long process 
of gradual "virtualization" of the page reached a new stage. Messages written on 
clay tablets, which were almost indestructible, were replaced by ink on paper. Ink, 
in its turn, was replaced by bits of computer memory, making characters on an 
electronic screen. Now, with HTML, which allows parts of a single page to be 
located on different computers, the page became even more fluid and unstable.   
 
The conceptual development of the page in computer media can also be 
read in a different way &mdash; not as a further development of a codex form, but as a 
return to earlier forms such as the papyrus roll of ancient Egypt, Greece and 
Rome. Scrolling through the contents of a computer window or a World Wide 
Web page has more in common with unrolling than turning the pages of a modern 
book. In the case of the Web of the 1990s, the similarity with a roll is even 
stronger because the information is not available all at once, but arrives 
sequentially, top to bottom, as though the roll is being unrolled.  
 
while mixing together its different historical forms is the Web page created in 
1997 by the British design collective antirom for HotWired RGB Gallery.
designers have created a large surface containing rectangular blocks of texts in 

A good example of how cultural interfaces stretch the definition of a page 

63

 The 

 

&#xC; 

85

65

 and Netomat (1999) by Maciej Wisniewski.

66

By the mid 1990's, Web pages included a variety of media types &mdash; but 

different font sizes, arranged without any apparent order. The user is invited to 
skip from one block to another moving in any direction. Here, the different 
directions of reading used in different cultures are combined together in a single 
page.  
 
they were still essentially traditional pages. Different media elements &mdash; graphics, 
photographs, digital video, sound and 3D worlds &mdash; were embedded within 
rectangular surfaces containing text. To that extent a typical Web age was 
conceptually similar to a newspaper page which is also dominated by text, with 
photographs, drawings, tables and graphs embedded in between, along with links 
to other pages of the newspaper. VRML evangelists wanted to overturn this 
hierarchy by imaging the future in which the World Wide Web is rendered as a 
giant 3D space, with all the other media types, including text, existing within it.
Given that the history of a page stretches for thousands of years, I think it is 
unlikely that it would disappear so quickly.    
 
As Web page became a new cultural convention of its own, its dominance 
was challenged by two Web browsers created by artists &mdash; Web Stalker (1997) by 
I/O/D collective
 Web Stalker 
emphasizes the hypertextual nature of the Web. Instead of rendering standard 
Web pages, it renders the networks of hyperlinks these pages embody. When a 
user enters a URL for a particular page, Web Stalker displays all pages linked to 
this page as a line graph. Netomat similarly refuses the page convention of the 
Web. The user enters a word or a phrase which are passed to search engines. 
Netomat then extracts page titles, images, audio or any other media type, as 
specified by the user, from the found pages and floats them across the computer 
screen. As can be seen, both browsers refuse the page metaphor, instead 
substituting their own metaphors: a graph showing the structure of links in the 
case of Web Stalker, a flow of media elements in the case of Netomat.  

64
 

While the 1990's Web browsers and other commercial cultural interfaces 
have retained the modern page format, they also have come to rely on a new way 
of organizing and accessing texts which has little precedent within book tradition 
&mdash; hyperlinking. We may be tempted to trace hyperlinking to earlier forms and 
practices of non-sequential text organization, such as the Torah's interpretations 
and footnotes, but it is actually fundamentally different from them. Both the 
Torah's interpretations and footnotes imply a master-slave relationship between 
one text and another. But in the case of hyperlinking as implemented by HTML 
and earlier by Hypercard, no such relationship of hierarchy is assumed. The two 
sources connected through a hyperlink have an equal weight; neither one 
dominates the other .Thus the acceptance of hyperlinking in the 1980's can be 
correlated with contemporary culture&rsquo;s suspicion of all hierarchies, and preference 
for the aesthetics of collage where radically different sources are brought together 
within the singular cultural object ("post-modernism").  

 

&#xC; 

86

67

 
Traditionally, texts encoded human knowledge and memory, instructed, 
inspired, convinced and seduced their readers to adopt new ideas, new ways of 
interpreting the world, new ideologies. In short, the printed word was linked to the 
art of rhetoric. While it is probably possible to invent a new rhetoric of 
hypermedia, which will use hyperlinking not to distract the reader from the 
argument (as it is often the case today), but instead to further convince her of 
argument's validity, the sheer existence and popularity of hyperlinking 
exemplifies the continuing decline of the field of rhetoric in the modern era. 
Ancient and Medieval scholars have classified hundreds of different rhetorical 
figures. In the middle of the twentieth century linguist Roman Jakobson, under the 
influence of computer's binary logic, information theory and cybernetics to which 
he was exposed at MIT where he was teaching, radically reduced rhetoric to just 
two figures: metaphor and metonymy.
 Finally, in the 1990's, the World Wide 
Web hyperlinking has privileged the single figure of metonymy at the expense of 
all others.
 The hypertext of the World Wide Web leads the reader from one text 
to another, ad infinitum. Contrary to the popular image, in which computer media 
collapses all human culture into a single giant library (which implies the existence 
of some ordering system), or a single giant book (which implies a narrative 
progression), it maybe more accurate to think of the new media culture as an 
infinite flat surface where individual texts are placed in no particular order, like 
the Web page designed by antirom for HotWired. Expanding this comparison 
further, we can note that Random Access Memory, the concept behind the group's 
name, also implies the lack of hierarchy: any RAM location can be accessed as 
quickly as any other. In contrast to the older storage media of book, film, and 
magnetic tape, where data is organized sequentially and linearly, thus suggesting 
the presence of a narrative or a rhetorical trajectory, RAM "flattens" the data. 
Rather than seducing the user through the careful arrangement of arguments and 
examples, points and counterpoints, changing rhythms of presentation (i.e., the 
rate of data streaming, to use contemporary language), simulated false paths and 
dramatically presented conceptual breakthroughs, cultural interfaces, like RAM 
itself, bombards the users with all the data at once.
 
modernism" as that of spatialization: privileging space over time, flattening 
historical time, refusing grand narratives. Computer media, which has evolved 
during the same decade, accomplished this spatialization quite literally. It 
replaced sequential storage with random-access storage; hierarchical organization 
of information with a flattened hypertext; psychological movement of narrative in 
novel and cinema with physical movement through space, as witnessed by endless 
computer animated fly-throughs or computer games such as Myst, Doom and 
countless others (see &ldquo;Navigable Space.&rdquo;) In short, time becomes a flat image or a 
landscape, something to look at or navigate through. If there is a new rhetoric or 

In the 1980's many critics have described one of key's effects of "post-

69

   

68

 

&#xC; 

87

  

  

aesthetic which is possible here, it may have less to do with the ordering of time 
by a writer or an orator, and more with spatial wandering. The hypertext reader is 
like Robinson Crusoe, walking through the sand and water, picking up a 
navigation journal, a rotten fruit, an instrument whose purpose he does not know; 
leaving imprints in the sand, which, like computer hyperlinks, follow from one 
found object to another.  
 
 
Cinema 
 
Printed word tradition which has initially dominated the language of cultural 
interfaces, is becoming less important, while the part played by cinematic 
elements is getting progressively stronger. This is consistent with a general trend 
in modern society towards presenting more and more information in the form of 
time-based audio-visual moving image sequences, rather than as text. As new 
generations of both computer users and computer designers are growing up in a 
media-rich environment dominated by television rather than by printed texts, it is 
not surprising that they favor cinematic language over the language of print.  
 
A hundred years after cinema's birth, cinematic ways of seeing the world, 
of structuring time, of narrating a story, of linking one experience to the next, are 
being extended to become the basic ways in which computer users access and 
interact with all cultural data. In this way, the computer fulfills the promise of 
cinema as a visual Esperanto which pre-occupied many film artists and critics in 
the 1920s, from Griffith to Vertov. Indeed, millions of computer users 
communicate with each other through the same computer interface. And, in 
contrast to cinema where most of its "users" were able to "understand" cinematic 
language but not "speak" it (i.e., make films), all computer users can "speak" the 
language of the interface. They are active users of the interface, employing it to 
perform many tasks: send email, organize their files, run various applications, and 
so on.  
 
The original Esperanto never became truly popular. But cultural interfaces 
are widely used and are easily learned. We have an unprecedented situation in the 
history of cultural languages: something which is designed by a rather small 
group of people is immediately adopted by millions of computer users.  How is it 
possible that people around the world adopt today something which a 20-
something programmer in Northern California has hacked together just the night 
before?  Shall we conclude that we are somehow biologically "wired" to the 
interface language, the way we are "wired," according to the original hypothesis 
of Noam Chomsky, to different natural languages?  
 
languages, be it cinema a hundred years ago, or cultural interfaces today, because 
these languages are based on previous and already familiar cultural forms. In the 

The answer is of course no. Users are able to "acquire" new cultural 

 

&#xC; 

88

Abstracted from its historical temporary "imprisonment" within the 

case of cinema, it was theater, magic lantern shows and other nineteenth century 
forms of public entertainment. Cultural interfaces in their turn draw on older 
cultural forms such as the printed word and cinema. I have already discussed 
some ways in which the printed word tradition structures interface language; now 
it is cinema's turn.        
 
I will begin with probably the most important case of cinema's influence 
on cultural interfaces &mdash; the mobile camera. Originally developed as part of 3D 
computer graphics technology for such applications as computer-aided design, 
flight simulators and computer movie making, during the 1980's and 1990's the 
camera model became as much of an interface convention as scrollable windows 
or cut and paste operations. It became an accepted way for interacting with any 
data which is represented in three dimensions &mdash; which, in a computer culture, 
means literally anything and everything: the results of a physical simulation, an 
architectural site, design of a new molecule, statistical data, the structure of a 
computer network and so on. As computer culture is gradually spatializing all 
representations and experiences, they become subjected to the camera's particular 
grammar of data access. Zoom, tilt, pan and track: we now use these operations to 
interact with data spaces, models, objects and bodies.  
 
physical body of a movie camera directed at physical reality, a virtualized camera 
also becomes an interface to all types of media and information beside 3D space. 
As an example, consider GUI of the leading computer animation software &mdash;  
PowerAnimator from Alias/Wavefront.
regardless of whether it displays a 3D model, a graph or even plain text, contains 
Dolly, Track and Zoom buttons. It is particularly important that the user is 
expected to dolly and pan over text as if it was a 3D scene. In this interface, 
cinematic vision triumphed over the print tradition, with the camera subsuming 
the page. The Guttenberg galaxy turned out to be just a subset of the Lumi&egrave;res' 
universe.     
 
interfaces is a rectangular framing of represented reality.
this framing from Western painting. Since the Renaissance, the frame acted as a 
window onto a larger space which was assumed to extend beyond the frame. This 
space was cut by the frame's rectangle into two parts: "onscreen space," the part 
which is inside the frame, and the part which is outside. In the famous formulation 
of Leon-Battista Alberti, the frame acted as a window onto the world. Or, in a 
more recent formulation of French film theorist Jacques Aumont and his co-
authors, "The onscreen space is habitually perceived as included within a more 
vast scenographic space. Even though the onscreen space is the only visible part, 
this larger scenographic part is nonetheless considered to exist around it."

Another feature of cinematic perception which persists in cultural 

 In this interface, each window, 

70

71

 Cinema itself inherited 

72

  

 

&#xC; 

89

73

74

 As in cinema, the virtual camera 

Of course, the camera is now controlled by the user and in fact is 

Just as a rectangular frame of painting and photography presents a part of 

 
a larger space outside it, a window in HCI presents a partial view of a larger 
document. But if in painting (and later in photography), the framing chosen by an 
artist was final, computer interface benefits from a new invention introduced by 
cinema: the mobility of the frame. As a kino-eye moves around the space 
revealing its different regions, so can a computer user scroll through a window's 
contents.   
 
It is not surprising to see that screen-based interactive 3D environments, 
such as VRML words, also use cinema's  rectangular framing since they rely on 
other elements of cinematic vision, specifically a mobile virtual camera. It may be 
more surprising to realize that Virtual Reality (VR) interface, often promoted as 
 As in cinema, the 
the most "natural" interface of all, utilizes the same framing.
world presented to a VR user is cut by a rectangular frame. As in cinema, this 
frame presents a partial view of a larger space.
moves around to reveal different parts of this space.  
 
identified with his/her own sight. Yet, it is crucial that in VR one is seeing the 
virtual world through a rectangular frame, and that this frame always presents 
only a part of a larger whole. This frame creates a distinct subjective experience 
which is much more close to cinematic perception than to unmediated sight.     
 
Interactive virtual worlds, whether accessed through a screen-based or a 
VR interface, are often discussed as the logical successor to cinema, as potentially 
the key cultural form of the twenty-first century, just as cinema was the key 
cultural form of the twentieth century. These discussions usually focus on the 
issues of interaction and narrative. So, the typical scenario for twenty-first century 
cinema involves a user represented as an avatar existing literally "inside" the 
narrative space, rendered with photorealistic 3D computer graphics, interacting 
with virtual characters and perhaps other users, and affecting the course of 
narrative events.  
 
invoked in new media discussions of the 1990's, indeed represent an extension of 
cinema or if they rather should be thought of as a continuation of some theatrical 
traditions, such as improvisational or avant-garde theater. But what undoubtedly 
can be observed in the 1990's is how virtual technology's dependence on cinema's 
mode of seeing and language is becoming progressively stronger. This coincides 
with the move from proprietary and expensive VR systems to more widely 
available and standardized technologies, such as VRML (Virtual Reality 
Modeling Language). (The following examples refer to a particular VRML 
browser &#x97;&mdash; WebSpace Navigator 1.1 from SGI.75  Other VRML browsers have 
similar features.) 

It is an open question whether this and similar scenarios commonly 

 

&#xC; 

90

76

Equally interesting is another option which controls how a VRML browser 

 
The creator of a VRML world can define a number of viewpoints which 
are loaded with the world.
 These viewpoints automatically appear in a special 
menu in  a VRML browser which allows the user to step through them, one by 
one. Just as in cinema, ontology is coupled with epistemology: the world is 
designed to be viewed from particular points of view. The designer of a virtual 
world is thus a cinematographer as well as an architect. The user can wander 
around the world or she can save time by assuming the familiar position of a 
cinema viewer for whom the cinematographer has already chosen the best 
viewpoints.  
 
moves from one viewpoint to the next. By default, the virtual camera smoothly 
travels through space from the current viewpoint to the next as though on a dolly, 
its movement automatically calculated by the software. Selecting the "jump cuts" 
option makes it cut from one view to the next. Both modes are obviously derived 
from cinema. Both are more efficient than trying to explore the world on its own.  
 
With a VRML interface, nature is firmly subsumed under culture. The eye 
is subordinated to the kino-eye. The body is subordinated to a virtual body of a 
virtual camera. While the user can investigate the world on her own, freely 
selecting trajectories and viewpoints, the interface privileges cinematic perception 
&mdash; cuts, pre-computed dolly-like smooth motions of a virtual camera, and pre-
selected viewpoints.  
 
transformed into a cultural interface most aggressively is computer games. By the 
1990's, game designers have moved from two to three dimensions and have begun 
to incorporate cinematic language in a increasingly systematic fashion. Games 
started featuring lavish opening cinematic sequences (called in the game business 
"cinematics") to set the mood, establish the setting and introduce the narrative. 
Frequently, the whole game would be structured as an oscillation between 
interactive fragments requiring user's input and non-interactive cinematic 
sequences, i.e. "cinematics." As the decade progressed, game designers were 
creating increasingly complex &mdash; and increasingly cinematic &mdash; interactive virtual 
worlds. Regardless of a game's genre &mdash; action/adventure, fighting, flight 
simulator, first-person action, racing or simulation &mdash; they came to rely on 
cinematography techniques borrowed from traditional cinema, including the 
expressive use of camera angles and depth of field, and dramatic lighting of 3D 
computer generated sets to create mood and atmosphere. In the beginning of the 
decade, many games such as The 7th Guest (Trilobyte, 1993) or Voyeur (1994) or 
used digital video of actors superimposed over 2D or 3D backgrounds, but by its 
end they switched to fully synthetic characters rendered in real time.
switch allowed game designers to go beyond branching-type structure of earlier 
games based on digital video were all the possible scenes had to be taped 
beforehand. In contrast, 3D characters animated in real time move arbitrary 

The area of computer culture where cinematic interface is being 

77

 This 

 

&#xC; 

91

78

A particularly important example of how computer games use &mdash; and 

around the space, and the space itself can change during the game. (For instance, 
when a player returns to the already visited area, she will find any objects she left 
there earlier.) This switch also made virtual words more cinematic, as the 
characters could be better visually integrated with their environments.
  
 
extend &mdash; cinematic language, is their implementation of a dynamic point of view. 
In driving and flying simulators and in combat games, such as Tekken 2 (Namco, 
1994 -), after a certain event takes place (car crashes, a fighter being knocked 
down), it is automatically replayed from a different point of view. Other games 
such as the Doom series (Id Software, 1993 -) and Dungeon Keeper (Bullfrog 
Productions, 1997) allow the user to switch between the point of view of the hero 
and a top down "bird's eye" view. The designers of online virtual worlds such as 
Active Worlds provide their users with similar capabilities. Finally, Nintendo 
went even further by dedicating four buttons on their N64 joypad to controlling 
the view of the action. While playing Nintendo games such as Super Mario 64 
(Nintendo, 1996) the user can continuously adjust the position of the camera. 
Some Sony Playstation games such as Tomb Rider (Eidos, 1996) also use the 
buttons on the Playstation joypad for changing point of view. Some games such as 
Myth: The Fallen Lords (Bungie, 1997) go further, using an AI engine (computer 
code which controls the simulated &ldquo;life&rdquo; in the game, such as human characters 
the player encounters) to automatically control their camera.  
 
game consoles is truly a historical event. Directing the virtual camera becomes as 
important as controlling the hero's actions. This is admitted by the game industry 
itself. For instance, a package for Dungeon Keeper lists four key features of the 
game, out of which the first two concern control over the camera: "switch your 
perspective," "rotate your view," "take on your friend," "unveil hidden levels." In 
games such as this one, cinematic perception functions as the subject in its own 
 Here, the computer games are returning to "The New Vision" movement 
right.
of the 1920s (Moholy-Nagy, Rodchenko, Vertov and others), which foregrounded 
new mobility of a photo and film camera, and made unconventional points of 
view the key part of their poetics.   
 
The fact that computer games and virtual worlds continue to encode, step 
by step, the grammar of a kino-eye in software and in hardware is not an accident. 
This encoding is consistent with the overall trajectory driving the computerization 
of culture since the 1940's, that being the automation of all cultural operations.  
This automation gradually moves from basic to more complex operations: from 
image processing and spell checking to software-generated characters, 3D worlds, 
and Web Sites. The side effect of this automation is that once particular cultural 
codes are implemented in low-level software and hardware, they are no longer 
seen as choices but as unquestionable defaults. To take the automation of imaging 
as an example, in the early 1960's the newly emerging field of computer graphics 

The incorporation of virtual camera controls into the very hardware of a 

79

 

&#xC; 

92

81

) To use the 

 

80

incorporated a linear one-point perspective in 3D software, and later directly in 
hardware.
 As a result, linear perspective became the default mode of vision in 
computer culture, be it computer animation, computer games, visualization or 
VRML worlds. Now we are witnessing the next stage of this process: the 
translation of cinematic grammar of points of view into software and hardware. 
As Hollywood cinematography is translated into algorithms and computer chips, 
its convention becomes the default method of interacting with any data subjected 
to spatialization, with a narrative, and with other human beings. (At SIGGRAPH 
'97 in Los Angeles, one of the presenters called for the incorporation of 
Hollywood-style editing in multi-user virtual worlds software. In such 
implementation, user interaction with other avatar(s) will be automatically 
rendered using classical Hollywood conventions for filming dialog.
terms from the 1996 paper authored by Microsoft researchers and entitled &ldquo;The 
Virtual Cinematographer:  A Paradigm for Automatic Real-Time Camera Control 
and Directing,&rdquo; the goal of research is to encode &ldquo;cinematographic expertise,&rdquo; 
82
translating &ldquo;heuristics of filmmaking&rdquo; into computer software and hardware.
Element by element, cinema is being poured into a computer: first one-point 
linear perspective; next the mobile camera and a rectangular window; next 
cinematography and editing conventions, and, of course, digital personas also 
based on acting conventions borrowed from cinema, to be followed by make-up, 
set design, and the narrative structures themselves. From one cultural language 
among others, cinema is becoming the cultural interface, a toolbox for all cultural 
communication, overtaking the printed word.   
 
life as the toolbox of a computer user. Cinematic means of perception, of 
connecting space and time, of representing human memory, thinking, and 
emotions become a way of work and a way of life for millions in the computer 
age. Cinema's aesthetic strategies have become basic organizational principles of 
computer software. The window in a fictional world of a cinematic narrative has 
become a window in a datascape. In short, what was cinema has become human-
computer interface.   
 
I will conclude this section by discussing a few artistic projects which, in 
different ways, offer alternatives to this trajectory. To summarize it once again, 
the trajectory involves gradual translation of elements and techniques of cinematic 
perception and language into a de-contextualized set of tools to be used as an 
interface to any data. In the process of this translation, cinematic perception is 
divorced from its original material embodiment (camera, film stock), as well as 
from the historical contexts of its formation. If in cinema the camera functioned as 
a material object, co-existing, spatially and temporally, with the world it was 
showing us, it has now become a set of abstract operations. The art projects 
described below refuse this separation of cinematic vision from the material 

Cinema, the major cultural form of the twentieth century, has found a new 

 

&#xC; 

93

In The Invisible Shape of Things Past Joachim Sauter and Dirk 

83

 The 

In following with the already noted general trend of computer culture 

world. They reunite perception and material reality by making the camera and 
what it records a part of a virtual world's ontology. They also refuse the 
universalization of cinematic vision by computer culture, which (just as post-
modern visual culture in general) treats cinema as a toolbox, a set of "filters" 
which can be used to process any input. In contrast, each of these projects 
employs a unique cinematic strategy which has a specific relation to the particular 
virtual world it reveals to the user.      
 
L&uuml;senbrink of the Berlin-based Art+Com collective created a truly innovative 
cultural interface for accessing historical data about Berlin's history.
interface de-virtualizes cinema, so to speak, by placing the records of cinematic 
vision back into their historical and material context. As the user navigates 
through a 3D model of Berlin, he or she comes across elongated shapes lying on 
city streets. These shapes, which the authors call "filmobjects", correspond to 
documentary footage recorded at the corresponding points in the city. To create 
each shape the original footage is digitized and the frames are stacked one after 
another in depth, with the original camera parameters determining the exact 
shape. The user can view the footage by clicking on the first frame. As the frames 
are displayed one after another, the shape is getting correspondingly thinner.     
 
towards spatialization of every cultural experience, this cultural interface 
spatializes time, representing it as a shape in a 3D space. This shape can be 
thought of as a book, with individual frames stacked one after another as book 
pages. The trajectory through time and space taken by a camera becomes a book 
to be read, page by page. The records of camera's vision become material objects, 
sharing the space with the material reality which gave rise to this vision. Cinema 
is solidified. This project, than, can be also understood as a virtual monument to 
cinema. The (virtual) shapes situated around the (virtual) city,  remind us about 
the era when cinema was the defining form of cultural expression &mdash; as opposed 
to a toolbox for data retrieval and use, as it is becoming today in a computer.  
 
vision imposed by computer software, that of the one-point linear perspective. 
Each of his computer animated films The Garden (1992), The Forest (1993) and  
The Way (1994) utilizes a particular perspectival system: a water-drop 
perspective in The Garden, a cylindrical perspective in The Forest and a reverse 
perspective in The Way. Working with computer programmers, the artist created 
custom-made 3D software to implement these perspectival systems. Each of the 
systems has an inherent relationship to the subject of a film in which it is used. In 
The Garden, its subject is the perspective of a small child, for whom the world 
does not yet have an objective existence. In The Forest, the mental trauma of 
emigration is transformed into the endless roaming of a camera through the forest 
which is actually just a set of transparent cylinders. Finally, in The Way, the self-

Hungarian-born artist Tam&aacute;s Waliczky openly refuses the default mode of 

 

&#xC; 

94

In Waliczky's films the camera and the world are made into a single 

sufficiency and isolation of a Western subject are conveyed by the use of a 
reverse perspective.   
 
whole, whereas in The Invisible Shape of Things Past the records of the camera 
are placed back into the world. Rather than simply subjecting his virtual worlds to 
different types of perspectival projection, Waliczky modified the spatial structure 
of the worlds themselves. In The Garden, a child playing in a garden becomes the 
center of the world; as he moves around, the actual geometry of all the objects 
around him is transformed, with objects getting bigger as he gets close to him. To 
create The Forest, a number of cylinders were placed inside each other, each 
cylinder mapped with a picture of a tree, repeated a number of times. In the film, 
we see a camera moving through this endless static forest in a complex spatial 
trajectory &mdash; but this is an illusion. In reality, the camera does move, but the 
architecture of the world is constantly changing as well, because each cylinder is 
rotating at its own speed. As a result, the world and its perception are fused 
together.          
     
 
HCI: Representation versus Control 
 
The development of human-computer interface, until recently, had little to do 
with distribution of cultural objects. Following some of the main applications 
from the 1940's until the early 1980's, when the current generation of GUI was 
developed and reached the mass market together with the rise of a PC (personal 
computer), we can list the most significant: real-time control of weapons and 
weapon systems; scientific simulation; computer-aided design; finally, office 
work with a secretary as a prototypical computer user, filing documents in a 
folder, emptying a trash can, creating and editing documents ("word processing"). 
Today, as the computer is starting to host very different applications for access 
and manipulation of cultural data and cultural experiences, their interfaces still 
rely on old metaphors and action grammars. Thus, cultural interfaces predictably 
use elements of a general-purpose HCI such as scrollable windows containing text 
and other data types, hierarchical menus, dialogue boxes, and command-line 
input. For instance, a typical "art collection" CD-ROM may try to recreate "the 
museum experience" by presenting a navigable 3D rendering of a museum space, 
while still resorting to hierarchical menus to allow the user to switch between 
different museum collections. Even in the case of The Invisible Shape of Things 
Past which uses a unique interface solution of "filmobjects" which is not directly 
traceable to either old cultural forms or general-purpose HCI, the designers are 
still relying on HCI convention in one case &mdash; the use of a pull-down menu to 
switch between different maps of Berlin. 

 

&#xC; 

95

84

 In contrast to a 

In general, cultural interfaces of the 1990's try to walk an uneasy path 

In their important study of new media Remediation, Jay David Bolter and 

 
Richard Grusin define medium as &ldquo;that which remediates.&rdquo;
modernist view aims to define the essential properties of every medium, Bolter 
and Grusin propose that all media work by &ldquo;remediating,&rdquo; i.e. translating, 
refashioning, and reforming other media, both on the levels of content and form. 
If we are to think of human-computer interface as another media, its history and 
present development definitely fits this thesis. The history of human-computer 
interface is that of borrowing and reformulating, or, to use new media lingo, 
reformatting other media, both past and present: the printed page, film, television. 
But along with borrowing conventions of most other media and eclectically 
combining them together, HCI designers also heavily borrowed &ldquo;conventions&rdquo; of 
human-made physical environment, beginning with Macintosh use of desktop 
metaphor. And, more than an media before it, HCI is like a chameleon which 
keeps changing its appearance, responding to how computers are used in any 
given period. For instance, if in the 1970s the designers at Xerox Park modeled 
the first GUI on the office desk, because they imagined that the computer were 
designing will be used in the office, in the 1990s the primary use of computers as 
media access machine led to the borrowing of interfaces of already familiar media 
devices, such as VCR or audio CD player controls.      
 
between the richness of control provided in general-purpose HCI and an 
"immersive" experience of traditional cultural objects such as books and movies. 
Modern general-purpose HCI, be it MAC OS, Windows or UNIX, allow their 
users to perform complex and detailed actions on computer data: get information 
about an object, copy it, move it to another location, change the way data is 
displayed, etc. In contrast, a conventional book or a film positions the user inside 
the imaginary universe whose structure is fixed by the author. Cultural interfaces 
attempt to mediate between these two fundamentally different and ultimately non-
compatible approaches.     
 
computer screen. If a general-purpose HCI clearly identifies to the user that 
certain objects can be acted on while others cannot (icons representing files but 
not the desktop itself), cultural interfaces typically hide the hyperlinks within a 
continuous representational field. (This technique was already so widely accepted 
by the 1990's that the designers of HTML offered it early on to the users by 
implementing the "imagemap" feature). The field can be a two-dimensional 
collage of different images, a mixture of representational elements and abstract 
textures, or a single image of a space such as a city street or a landscape. By trial 
and error, clicking all over the field, the user discovers that some parts of this 
field are hyperlinks. This concept of a screen combines two distinct pictorial 
conventions: the older Western tradition of pictorial illusionism in which a screen 
functions as a window into a virtual space, something for the viewer to look into 

As an example, consider how cultural interfaces conceptualize the 

 

&#xC; 

96

but not to act upon; and the more recent convention of graphical human-computer 
interfaces which, by dividing the computer screen into a set of controls with 
clearly delineated functions, essentially treats it as a virtual instrument panel. As a 
result, the computer screen becomes a battlefield for a number of incompatible 
definitions: depth and surface, opaqueness and transparency, image as an 
illusionary space and image as an instrument for action. 

Here is another example of how cultural interfaces try to find a middle 

The computer screen also functions both as a window into an illusionary 
space and as a flat surface carrying text labels and graphical icons. We can relate 
this to a similar understanding of a pictorial surface in the Dutch art of the 
seventeenth century, as analyzed by art historian Svetlana Alpers in her classical 
The Art of Describing. Alpers discusses how a Dutch painting of this period 
functioned as a combined map / picture, combining different kids of information 
and knowledge of the world.85  
 
ground between the conventions of general-purpose HCI and the conventions of 
traditional cultural forms. Again we encounter tension and struggle &mdash; in this 
case, between standardization and originality. One of the main principles of 
modern HCI is consistency principle. It dictates that menus, icons, dialogue boxes 
and other interface elements should be the same in different applications. The user 
knows that every application will contain a "file" menu, or that if she encounters 
an icon which looks like a magnifying glass it can be used to zoom on documents. 
In contrast, modern culture (including its "post-modern" stage) stresses 
originality: every cultural object is supposed to be different from the rest, and if it 
is quoting other objects, these quotes have to be defined as such. Cultural 
interfaces try to accommodate both the demand for consistency and the demand 
for originality. Most of them contain the same set of interface elements with 
standard semantics, such as "home," "forward" and "backward" icons. But 
because every Web site and CD-ROM is striving to have its own distinct design, 
these elements are always designed differently from one product to the next. For 
instance, many games such as War Craft II (Blizzard Entertainment, 1996) and 
Dungeon Keeper give their icons a "historical" look consistent with the mood of 
an imaginary universe portrayed in the game.    
 
The language of cultural interfaces is a hybrid. It is a strange, often 
awkward mix between the conventions of traditional cultural forms and the 
conventions of HCI &mdash; between an immersive environment and a set of controls; 
between standardization and originality. Cultural interfaces try to balance the 
concept of a surface in painting, photography, cinema, and the printed page as 
something to be looked at, glanced at, read, but always from some distance, 
without interfering with it, with the concept of the surface in a computer interface 
as a virtual control panel, similar to the control panel on a car, plane or any other 
complex machine.
 Finally, on yet another level, the traditions of the printed 
word and of cinema also compete between themselves. One pulls the computer 

86

 

&#xC; 

97

To see that this hybrid language of the cultural interfaces of the 1990s 

screen towards being dense and flat information surface, while another wants it to 
become a window into a virtual space.       
 
represents only one historical possibility, consider a very different scenario. 
Potentially, cultural interfaces could completely rely on already existing 
metaphors and action grammars of a standard HCI, or, at least, rely on them much 
more than they actually do. They don't have to "dress up" HCI with custom icons 
and buttons, or hide links within images, or organize the information as a series of 
pages or a 3D environment. For instance, texts can be presented simply as files 
inside a directory, rather than as a set of pages connected by custom-designed 
icons. This strategy of using standard HCI to present cultural objects is 
encountered quite rarely. In fact, I am aware of only one project which uses it 
completely consciously, as a though through choice rather than by necessity : a 
CD-ROM by Gerald Van Der Kaap entitled BlindRom V.0.9. (Netherlands, 
1993). The CD-ROM includes a standard-looking folder named "Blind Letter." 
Inside the folder there are a large number of text files. You don't have to learn yet 
another cultural interface, search for hyperlinks hidden in images or navigate 
through a 3D environment. Reading these files required simply opening them in 
standard Macintosh SimpleText, one by one. This simple technique works very 
well. Rather than distracting the user from experiencing the work, the computer 
interface becomes part and parcel of the work. Opening these files, I felt that I 
was in the presence of a new literary form for a new medium, perhaps the real 
medium of a computer &mdash; its interface.  
As the examples analyzed here illustrate, cultural interfaces try to create 
 
their own language rather than simply using general-purpose HCI. In doing so, 
these interfaces try to negotiate between metaphors and ways of controlling a 
computer developed in HCI, and the conventions of more traditional cultural 
forms. Indeed, neither extreme is ultimately satisfactory by itself. It is one thing to 
use a computer to control a weapon or to analyze statistical data, and it is another 
to use it to represent cultural memories, values and experiences. The interfaces 
developed for a computer in its functions of a calculator, control mechanism or a 
communication device are not necessarily suitable for a computer playing the role 
of a cultural machine. Conversely, if we simply mimic the existing conventions of 
older cultural forms such as the printed word and cinema, we will not take 
advantage of all the new capacities offered by a computer: its flexibility in 
displaying and manipulating data, interactive control by the user, the ability to run 
simulations, etc.  
 
language of cinema a hundred years ago. We don't know what the final result will 
be, or even if it will ever completely stabilize. Both the printed word and cinema 
eventually achieved stable forms which underwent little changes for long periods 
of time, in part because of the material investments in their means of production 
and distribution. Given that computer language is implemented in software, 

Today the language of cultural interfaces is in its early stage, as was the 

 

&#xC; 

98

potentially it can keep on changing forever. But there is one thing we can be sure 
of. We are witnessing the emergence of a new cultural meta-langauge, something 
which will be at least as significant as the printed word and cinema before it.     
 

 

&#xC; 

99

The Screen and the User 

VR, interactivity and telepresence are made possible by the recent 

 
Contemporary human-computer interfaces offer radical new possibilities for art 
and communication. Virtual reality allows us to travel through non-existent three-
dimensional spaces. A computer monitor connected to a network becomes a 
window through which we can be present in a place thousands of miles away. 
Finally, with the help of a mouse or a video camera, a computer is transformed 
into an intelligent being capable of engaging us in a dialogue.  
 
technology of a digital computer. However, they are made real by a much, much 
older technology &mdash; the screen. It is by looking at a screen &mdash; a flat, rectangular 
surface positioned at some distance from the eyes &mdash; that the user experiences the 
illusion of navigating through virtual spaces, of being physically present 
somewhere else or of being hailed by the computer itself. If computers have 
become a common presence in our culture only in the last decade, the screen, on 
the other hand, has been used to present visual information for centuries &mdash; from 
Renaissance painting to twentieth-century cinema. 
 
Today, coupled with a computer, the screen is rapidly becoming the main 
means of accessing any kind of information, be it still images, moving images or 
text. We are already using it to read the daily newspaper, to watch movies, to 
communicate with coworkers, relatives and friends, and, most importantly, to 
work (the screens of airline agents, data entry clerks, secretaries, engineers, 
doctors, pilots, etc.; the screens of ATM machines, supermarket checkouts, 
automobile control panels, and, of course, the screens of computers.) We may 
debate whether our society is a society of spectacle or of simulation, but, 
undoubtedly, it is the society of a screen. What are the different stages of the 
screen's history? What are the relationships between the physical space where the 
viewer is located, his/her body, and the screen space? What are the ways in which 
computer displays both continue and challenge the tradition of a screen?
 
 
A Screen's Genealogy 
 
Let us start with the definition of a screen. Visual culture of the modern period, 
from painting to cinema, is characterized by an intriguing phenomenon: the 
existence of another virtual space, another three-dimensional world enclosed by a 
frame and situated inside our normal space. The frame separates two absolutely 
different spaces that somehow coexist. This phenomenon is what defines the 
screen in the most general sense, or, as I will call it, the "classical screen." 
 
What are the properties of a classical screen? It is a flat, rectangular 
surface. It is intended for frontal viewing &mdash; as opposed to, for instance, a 
panorama. It exists in our normal space, the space of our body, and acts as a 

87

  

 

&#xC; 
100

window into another space. This other space, the space of representation, typically 
has a different scale from the scale of our normal space. Defined in this way, a 
screen describes equally well a Renaissance painting (recall Alberti&rsquo;s formulation 
referred to above) and a modern computer display. Even proportions have not 
changed in five centuries, they are similar for a typical fifteenth century painting, 
a film screen and a computer screen. In this respect it is not accidental that the 
very names of the two main formats of computer displays point to two genres of 
painting: a horizontal format is referred to as "landscape mode" while the vertical 
format is referred to as "portrait mode."  
 
A hundred years ago a new type of screen became popular, which I will 
call the "dynamic screen." This new type retains all the properties of a classical 
screen while adding something new: it can display an image changing over time. 
This is the screen of cinema, television, video. The dynamic screen also brings 
with it a certain relationship between the image and the spectator &mdash; a certain 
viewing regime, so to speak. This relationship is already implicit in the classical 
screen but now it fully surfaces. A screen's image strives for complete illusion and 
visual plenitude while the viewer is asked to suspend disbelief and to identify 
with the image. Although the screen in reality is only a window of limited 
dimensions positioned inside the physical space of the viewer, the latter is 
supposed to completely concentrate on what is seen in this window, focusing 
attention on the representation and disregarding the physical space outside. This 
viewing regime is made possible by the fact that, be it a painting, movie screen or 
television screen, the singular image completely fills the screen. This is why we 
are so annoyed in a movie theater when the projected image does not precisely 
coincide with the screen's boundaries: it disrupts the illusion, making us conscious 
of what exists outside the representation.
 
is aggressive. It functions to filter, to screen out, to take over, rendering non-
existent whatever is outside its frame. Of course, the degree of this filtering varies 
between cinema viewing and television viewing. In cinema viewing, the viewer is 
asked to completely merge with the screen's space. In television viewing, the 
screen is smaller, lights are on, conversation between viewers is allowed, and the 
act of viewing is often integrated with other daily activities. Still, overall this 
viewing regime remains stable &mdash; until recently.  
 
On the one hand, rather than showing a single image, a computer screen typically 
displays a number of coexisting windows. Indeed, the coexistence of a number of 
overlapping windows is a fundamental principle of modern GUI. No single 
window completely dominates the viewer's attention. In this sense the possibility 
of simultaneously observing a few images which coexist within one screen can be 
compared with the phenomenon of zapping &mdash; the quick switching of television 
channels that allows the viewer to follow more than program.

Rather than being a neutral medium of presenting information, the screen 

This stability has been challenged by the arrival of the computer screen. 

88

  

89

 In both instances, 

 

&#xC; 
101

On the other hand, with VR, the screen disappears altogether. VR typically 

the viewer no longer concentrates on a single image. (Some television sets enable 
a second channel to be watched within a smaller window positioned in a corner of 
the main screen. Perhaps future TV sets will adopt the window metaphor of a 
computer.) A window interface has more to do with modern graphic design, 
which treats a page as a collection of different but equally important blocks of 
data such as text, images, and graphic elements, than with cinematic screen. 
 
uses a head-mounted display whose images completely fill viewer's visual field. 
No longer is the viewer looking forward at a rectangular, flat surface located at a 
certain distance and which acts as a window into another space. Now she is fully 
situated within this other space. Or, more precisely, we can say that the two 
spaces, the real, physical space and the virtual simulated space, coincide. The 
virtual space, previously confined to a painting or a movie screen, now 
completely encompasses the real space. Frontality, rectangular surface, difference 
in scale are all gone. The screen has vanished. 
 
Both situations &mdash; window interface and VR &mdash; disrupt the viewing 
regime which characterizes the historical period of the dynamic screen. This 
regime, based on the identification of the viewer with a screen image, reaches its 
culmination in the cinema which goes to the extreme to enable this identification 
(the bigness of the screen, the darkness of the surrounding space) while still 
relying on a screen &mdash; a rectangular flat surface.   
 
ending. And it is this disappearance of the screen &mdash; its splitting into many 
windows in window interface, its complete take over of the visual field in VR &mdash; 
that allows us today to recognize it as a cultural category and begin to trace its 
history.    
 
The origins of the cinema's screen are well known. We can trace its 
emergence to the popular spectacles and entertainment of the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries: magic lantern shows, phantasmagoria, eidophusikon, 
panorama, diorama, zoopraxiscope shows, and so on. The public was ready for 
cinema and when it finally appeared it was a huge public event. Not by accident 
the "invention" of cinema was claimed by at least a dozen of individuals from a 
half-dozen countries.
 
middle of this century but it does not become a public presence until much later; 
and its history has not yet been written. Both of these facts are related to the 
context in which it emerged: as with all the other elements of modern human-
computer interface, the computer screen was developed for military use. Its 
history has to do not with public entertainment but with military surveillance.  
 
photography. From the advent of photography there existed an interest in using it 
for aerial surveillance. F&eacute;lix Tournachon Nadar, one of the most eminent 

The origin of the computer screen is a different story. It appears in the 

Thus, the era of the dynamic screen which began with cinema is now 

The history of modern surveillance technologies begins at least with 

90

  

 

&#xC; 
102

91

 

Radar became the next major surveillance technology. Massively 

Consider the imaging technologies of photography and film. The 

photographers of the nineteenth century, succeeded in exposing a photographic 
plate at 262 feet over Bi&egrave;vre, France in 1858. He was soon approached by the 
French Army to attempt photo reconnaissance but rejected the offer. In 1882, 
unmanned photo balloons were already in the air; a little later, they were joined 
by photo rockets both in France and in Germany. The only innovation of World 
War I was to combine aerial cameras with a superior flying platform &mdash; the 
airplane.
 
employed in World War II, it provided important advantages over photography. 
Previously, military commanders had to wait until the pilots returned from 
surveillance missions and the film was developed. The inevitable delay between 
the time of the surveillance and the delivery of the finished image limited its 
usefulness because by the time the photograph was produced, enemy positions 
could have changed. However, with radar, as imaging became instantaneous, this 
delay was eliminated. The effectiveness of radar had to do with a new means of 
displaying an image &mdash; a new type of screen.  
 
photographic image is a permanent imprint corresponding to a single referent &mdash; 
whatever was in front of the lens when the photograph was taken. It also 
corresponds to a limited time of observation &mdash; the time of exposure). Film is 
based on the same principles. A film sequence, composed of a number of still 
images, represents the sum of referents and the sum of exposure times of these 
individual images. In either case, the image is fixed once and for all. Therefore 
the screen can only show past events.  
 
founded on the same principle but its mass employment comes later) of a 
fundamentally new type of screen, the screen which gradually comes to dominate 
modern visual culture &mdash; video monitor, computer screen, instrument display. 
What is new about such a screen is that its image can change in real time, 
reflecting changes in the referent, be it the position of an object in space (radar), 
any alteration in visible reality (live video) or changing data in the computer's 
memory (computer screen). The image can be continually updated in real time. 
This is the third, after classic and dynamic, type of a screen &mdash; the screen of real 
time. 
 
the element of time delay, always present in the technologies of military 
surveillance, is eliminated, in fact, time enters the real-time screen in a new way. 
In older, photographic technologies, all parts of an image are exposed 
simultaneously. Whereas now the image is produced through sequential scanning: 
circular in the case of radar, horizontal in the case of television. Therefore, the 
different parts of the image correspond to different moments in time. In this 

The radar screen changes, tracking the referent. But while it appears that 

With radar, we see for the first time the mass employment (television is 

 

&#xC; 
103

92

  

Next to photography, radar provided a superior way to gather information 

The principles and technology of radar were worked out independently by 

respect, a radar image is more similar to an audio record since consecutive 
moments in time become circular tracks on a surface.
 
What this means is that the image, in a traditional sense, no longer exists! 
And it is only by habit that we still refer to what we see on the real-time screen as 
"images." It is only because the scanning is fast enough and because, sometimes, 
the referent remains static, that we see what looks like a static image. Yet, such an 
image is no longer the norm, but the exception of a more general, new kind of 
representation for which we don't have a term yet. 
 
scientists in the United States, England, France and Germany during the 1930s. 
But, after the beginning of the War only the U.S. had the necessary resources to 
continue radar development. In 1940, at MIT, a team of scientists was gathered to 
work in the Radiation Laboratory or the "Rad Lab," as it came to be called. The 
purpose of the lab was radar research and production. By 1943, the "Rad Lab" 
occupied 115 acres of floor space; it had the largest telephone switchboard in 
Cambridge and employed 4,000 people.
 
about enemy locations. In fact, it provided too much information, more 
information than one person could deal with. Historical footage from the early 
days of the war shows a central command room with a large, table-size map of 
Britain.
 Small pieces of cardboard in the form of planes are positioned on the 
map to show the locations of actual German bombers. A few senior officers 
scrutinize the map. Meanwhile, women in army uniforms constantly change the 
location of the cardboard pieces by moving them with long sticks as information 
is transmitted from dozens of radar stations.
 
gathered by radar? The computer screen, as well as most other key principles and 
technologies of modern human-computer interface &mdash; interactive control, 
algorithms for 3D wireframe graphics, bit-mapped graphics &mdash; were developed as 
a way of solving this problem.  
 
dismantled after the end of the War, but soon the Air Force created another secret 
laboratory in its place &mdash; Lincoln Laboratory. The purpose of Lincoln Laboratory 
was to work on human factors and new display technologies for SAGE &mdash; "Semi-
Automatic Ground Environment," a command center to control the U.S. air 
defenses established in the mid-1950s.
  Historian of technology Paul Edwards 
writes that SAGE's job "was to link together radar installations around the USA's 
perimeter, analyze and interpret their signals, and direct manned interceptor jets 
toward the incoming bee. It was to be a total system, one whose &lsquo;human 

The research again took place at MIT. The Radiation Laboratory was 

Was there a more effective way to process and display information 

94

93

  

95

 

96

 

&#xC; 
104

97

 

The creation of SAGE and the development of interactive human-

The earlier version of the center was called the Cape Cod network since it 

components' were fully integrated into the mechanized circuit of detection, 
decision and response."
 
computer interface was largely a result of a particular military doctrine. In the 
1950s the American military thought that when the Soviet Union attacked the 
U.S., it would send a large number of bombers simultaneously. Therefore, it 
seemed necessary to create a center which could receive information from all U.S. 
radar stations, track the large number of enemy bombers and coordinate the 
counterattack. A computer screen and the other components of the modern 
human-computer interface owe their existence to this particular military idea. (As 
somebody who was born in the Soviet Union and now woks on the history of new 
media in the U.S., I find this bit of history truly fascinating.)  
 
received information from the radars situated along the coast of New England.  
The center was operating right out of the Barta Building situated on the MIT 
campus. Each of 82 Air Force officers monitored his own computer display which 
showed the outlines of the New England Coast and the locations of key radars. 
Whenever an officer noticed a dot indicating a moving plane, he would tell the 
computer to follow the plane. To do this the officer simply had to touch the dot 
with the special "light pen."
 
Thus, the SAGE system contained all of the main elements of the modern 
human-computer interface. The light pen, designed in 1949, can be considered a 
precursor of the contemporary mouse. More importantly, at SAGE the screen 
came to be used not only to display information in real time, as in was in radar 
and television, but also to give commands to the computer. Rather than acting 
solely as a means to display an image of reality, the screen became the vehicle for 
directly affecting reality.  
 
number of computer graphics programs that relied on the screen as a means to 
input and output information from a computer. They included programs to display 
brain waves (1957), simulate planet and gravitational activity (1960), as well as to 
 The single most well known of these became a 
create 2D drawings (1958).
program called Sketchpad. Designed in 1962 by Ivan Sutherland, a graduate 
student supervised by Claude Shannon, it widely publicized the idea of interactive 
computer graphics. With Sketchpad, a human operator could create graphics 
directly on computer screen by touching the screen with a light pen. Sketchpad 
exemplified a new paradigm of interacting with computers: by changing 
something on the screen, the operator changed something in the computer's 
memory. The real-time screen became interactive. 
 
This, in short, is the history of the birth of the computer screen. But even 
before a computer screen became widely used, a new paradigm emerged &mdash; the 

Using the technology developed for SAGE,  Lincoln researchers created a 

98

  

99

 

&#xC; 
105

100

  

 

101

The screen disappeared. It completely took over the visual field.   

simulation of an interactive three-dimensional environment without a screen. In 
1966, Ivan Sutherland and his colleagues began research on the prototype of VR. 
The work was cosponsored by ARPA (Advanced Research Projects Agency) and 
the Office of Naval Research.
"The fundamental idea behind the three-dimensional display is to present 
 
the user with a perspective image which changes as he moves," wrote Sutherland 
in 1968.
 The computer tracked the position of the viewer's head and adjusted 
the perspective of the computer graphic image accordingly. The display itself 
consisted of two six-inch-long monitors which were mounted next to the temples. 
They projected an image which appeared superimposed over viewer's field of 
vision.     
 
 
 
The Screen and the Body 
 
I have presented one possible genealogy of the modern computer screen. In my 
genealogy, the computer screen represents an interactive type, a subtype of the 
real-time type, which is a subtype of the dynamic type, which is a subtype of the 
classical type. The discussion of these types relied on two ideas. First, the idea of 
temporality: the classical screen displays a static, permanent image; the dynamic 
screen displays a moving image of the past and finally, the real-time screen shows 
the present. Second, the relationship between the space of the viewer and the 
space of the representation (I defined the screen as a window into the space of 
representation which itself exists in our normal space). 
 
relationship between the screen and the body of the viewer. This is how Roland 
Barthes described the screen in "Diderot, Brecht, Eisenstein," written in 1973:  
 

Let us now look at the screen's history from another angle &mdash; the 

Representation is not defined directly by imitation: even if one gets rid of 
notions of the "real," of the "vraisemblable," of the "copy," there  will still 
be representation for as long as a subject (author, reader, spectator or 
voyeur) casts his gaze towards a horizon on which he cuts out a base of a 
triangle, his eye (or his mind) forming the apex. The "Organon of 
Representation" (which is today becoming possible to write because there 
are intimations of something else) will have as its dual foundation the 
sovereignty of the act of cutting out [d&eacute;coupage] and the unity of the 
subject of action... The scene, the picture, the shot, the cut-out rectangle, 
here we have the very condition that allows us to conceive theater, 
painting, cinema, literature, all those arts, that is, other than music and 
which could be called dioptric arts.

102

  

 

&#xC; 
106

103

What is the price the subject pays for the mastery of the world, focused 

 
For Barthes, the screen becomes the all-encompassing concept which covers the 
functioning of even non-visual representation (literature), although he does make 
an appeal to a particular visual model of linear perspective. At any rate, his 
concept encompasses all types of representational apparatuses I have discussed: 
painting, film, television, radar and computer display. In each of these, reality is 
cut by the rectangle of a screen: "a pure cut-out segment with clearly defined 
edges, irreversible and incorruptible; everything that surrounds it is banished into 
nothingness, remains unnamed, while everything that it admits within its field is 
promoted into essence, into light, into view."
 This act of cutting reality into a 
sign and nothingness simultaneously doubles the viewing subject who now exists 
in two spaces: the familiar physical space of his/her real body and the virtual 
space of an image within the screen. This split comes to the surface with VR, but 
it already exists with painting and other dioptric arts.      
 
and unified by the screen?    
 
The Draughtsman's Contrast, a 1981 film by Peter Greenway, concerns an 
architectural draftsman hired to produce a set of drawings of a country house. The 
draughtsman employs a simple drawing tool consisting of a square grid. 
Throughout the film, we repeatedly see the draughtsman's face through the grid 
which looks like the prison bars. It is as if the subject who attempts to catch the 
world, to immobilize it, to fix it within the representational apparatus (here, 
perspectival drawing), is trapped by this apparatus himself. The subject is 
imprisoned. 
 
I take this image as a metaphor for what appears to be a general tendency 
of the Western screen-based representational apparatus. In this tradition, the body 
must be fixed in space if the viewer is to see the image at all. From Renaissance 
monocular perspective to modern cinema, from Kepler's camera obscura to 
nineteenth century camera lucida, the body had to remain still.
 
The imprisonment of the body takes place on both the conceptual and 
literal levels; both kinds of imprisonment already appear with the first screen 
apparatus, Alberti's perspectival window. According to many interpreters of linear 
perspective, it presents the world as seen by a singular eye, static, unblinking and 
fixated. As described by Norman Bryson, perspective "followed the logic of the 
Gaze rather than the Glance, thus producing a visual take that was eternalized, 
reduced to one 'point of view' and disembodied."
 Bryson argues that "the gaze 
of the painter arrests the flux of phenomena, contemplates the visual field from a 
vantage-point outside the mobility of duration, in an eternal moment of disclosed 
presence."
 Correspondingly, the world, as seen by this immobile, static and 
atemporal Gaze, which belongs more to a statue than to a living body, becomes 
equally  immobile, reified, fixated, cold and dead. Writing about D&uuml;rer's famous 

104

    

105

106

 

&#xC; 
107

107

109

111

108

 And in The Draughtsman's 

 By the first decades of the sixteenth 

110

 Many varieties were 

With perspectival machines, the imprisonment of the subject also happens 

print of a draftsman drawing a nude through a screen of perspectival threads, 
Martin Jay notes that "a reifying male look" turns "its targets into stone"; 
consequently, "the marmoreal nude is drained of its capacity to arouse desire."
  
Similarly, John Berger compares Alberti's window to "a safe let into a wall, a safe 
into which the visible has been deposited."
Contract, time and again, the draughtsman tries to eliminate all motion, any sign 
of life from the scenes he is rendering.  
 
in a literal sense. From the onset of the adaptation of perspective, artists and 
draftsmen have attempted to aid the laborious manual process of creating 
perspectival images and, between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries, various 
"perspectival machines" were constructed.
century, D&uuml;rer described a number of such machines.
invented, but regardless of the type, the artist had to remain immobile throughout 
the process of drawing.     
 
Along with perspectival machines, a whole range of optical apparatuses 
was in use, particularly for depicting landscapes and conducting topographical 
surveys. The most popular optical apparatus was camera obscura.
 Camera 
obscura literally means "dark chamber." It was founded on the premise that if the 
rays of light from an object or a scene pass through a small aperture, they will 
cross and re-emerge on the other side to form an image on a screen. In order for 
the image to become visible, however, "it is necessary that the screen be placed in 
a chamber in which light levels are considerably lower than those around the 
object."
Kircher's Ars magna Lucis et umbrae (Rome, 1649), we see the subject enjoying 
the image inside a tiny room, oblivious to the fact that he had to imprison himself 
inside this "dark chamber" in order to see the image on the screen.  
 
prison, so to speak. It consisted of a small tent mounted on a tripod, with a 
revolving reflector and lens at its apex. Having positioned himself inside the tent 
which provided the necessary darkness, the draftsman would then  spend hours 
meticulously tracing the image projected by the lens.   
Early photography continued the trend toward the imprisonment of the 
 
subject and the object of representation. During photography's first decades, the 
exposure times were quite long. The daguerreotype process, for instance, required 
exposures of four to seven minutes in the sun and from 12 to 60 minutes in 
diffused light. So, similar to the drawings produced with the help of camera 
obscura, which depicted reality as static and immobile, early photographs 
represented the world as stable, eternal, unshakable. And when photography 
ventured to represent the living, such as the human subject, s/he had to be 

Later, smaller tent-type camera obscura became popular &mdash; a movable 

 Thus, in one of the earliest depictions of the camera obscura, in 

112

 

&#xC; 
108

 

113

Toward the end of the nineteenth century, the petrified world of the 

immobilized. Thus, portrait studios universally employed various clamps to 
assure the steadiness of the sitter throughout the lengthy time of exposure. 
Reminiscent of the torture instruments, the iron clamps firmly held the subject in 
place, the subject who voluntarily became the prisoner of the machine in order to 
see her/his own image
 
photographic image was shattered by the dynamic screen of the cinema. In "The 
Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," Walter Benjamin 
expressed his fascination with the new mobility of the visible: &ldquo;Our taverns and 
our metropolitan streets, our offices and furnished rooms, our railroad stations and 
our factories appeared to have us locked up hopelessly. When came the film and 
burst this prison-world asunder by the dynamite of the tenth of a second, so that 
now, in the midst of its far-flung ruins and debris, we calmly and adventurously 
go traveling.&rdquo;

114

  

116

115

The formation of this viewing regime took place in parallel with the shift 

The cinema screen enabled audiences to take a journey through different 
spaces without leaving their seats; in the words of film historian Anne Friedberg, 
it created "a mobilized virtual gaze."
 However, the cost of this virtual mobility 
was a new, institutionalized immobility of the spectator. All around the world 
large prisons were constructed which could hold hundreds of prisoners &mdash; movie 
houses. The prisoners could not neither talk to each other nor move from seat to 
seat. While they were taken on virtual journeys, their bodies had to remain still in 
the darkness of the collective camera obscuras.  
 
from what film theorists call "primitive" to "classical" film language.
important part of the shift, which took place in the 1910s, was the new 
functioning of the virtual space represented on the screen. During the "primitive" 
period, the space of the film theater and the screen space were clearly separated 
much like those of theater or vaudeville. The viewers were free to interact, come 
and go, and maintain a psychological distance from the virtual world of the 
cinematic narrative. In contrast, classical film addressed each viewer as a separate 
individual and positioned her/him inside its virtual world narrative. As noted by a 
contemporary in 1913, "they [spectators] should be put in the position of being a 
'knot hole in the fence' at every stage in the play."
 If "primitive cinema keeps 
the spectator looking across a void in a separate space,"
 now the spectator is 
placed at the best viewpoint of each shot, inside the virtual space.   
 
identification with the camera eye. The body of the spectator remains in the seat 
while her/his eye is coupled with a mobile camera. However, it is also possible to 
conceptualize this differently. We can imagine that the camera does not, in fact, 
move at all, that it remains stationary, coinciding with the spectator's eyes. 

This situation is usually conceptualized in terms of the spectator's 

 An 

117

118

 

&#xC; 
109

 Film theoretician Jean-Louis Baudry has probably more than 

 This immobility and confinement, according to Baudry, enables 

Film theorists have taken this immobility to be the essential feature of the 

Instead, it is the virtual space as a whole that changes its position with each shot. 
Using the contemporary vocabulary of computer graphics, we can say that this 
virtual space is rotated, scaled and zoomed to always give the spectator the best 
viewpoint. Like a striptease, the space slowly disrobes itself, turning, presenting 
itself from different sides, teasing, stepping forward and retracting, always 
leaving something covered, so the spectator will wait for the next shot ... the 
seductive dance which begins all other with the new scene. All spectator has to do 
is remain immobile.  
 
institution of cinema. Anne Friedberg wrote: "As everyone from Baudry (who 
compares cinematic spectation to the prisoners in Plato's cave) to Musser points 
out, the cinema relies on the immobility of the spectator, seated in an 
auditorium."
anyone put the emphasis on immobility as the foundation of cinematic illusion. 
Baudry quoted Plato: "In this underground chamber they have been from 
childhood, chained by the leg and also by the neck, so that they cannot move and 
can only see what is in front of them, because the chains will not let them turn 
their heads."
prisoners/spectators to mistake representations for their perceptions, regressing 
back to childhood when the two were indistinguishable. Thus, rather than a 
historical accident, according to Baudry's psychoanalytic explanation, the 
immobility of the spectator is the essential condition of cinematic pleasure.  
 
photography, cinema &mdash; in all of these screen-based apparatuses, the subject had 
to remain immobile. In fact, as Friedberg perceptively points out, the progressive 
mobilization of the image in modernity was accompanied by the progressive 
imprisonment of the viewer: "as the 'mobility' of the gaze became more 'virtual' 
&mdash; as techniques were developed to paint (and then to photograph) realistic 
images, as mobility was implied by changes in lighting (and then 
cinematography) &mdash; the observer became more immobile, passive, ready to 
receive the constructions of a virtual reality placed in front of his or her unmoving 
body."
 
representational apparatus &mdash; VR? On the one hand, VR does constitute a 
fundamental break with this tradition. It establishes a radically new type of 
relationship between the body of a viewer and an image. In contrast to cinema, 
where the mobile camera moves independent of the immobile spectator, now the 
spectator has to actually move around the physical space in order to experience 
the movement in virtual space. The effect is as though the camera is mounted on 
user's head. So, in order to look up in virtual space, one has to look up in physical 
space; in order to "virtually" step forward one has to actually step forward and so 

Alberti's window, D&uuml;rer's perspectival machines, camera obscura, 

121

     

What happens to this tradition with the arrival of a screen-less 

119

120

 

&#xC; 
110

At the same time, VR imprisons the body to an unprecedented extent than 

122  The spectator is no longer chained, immobilized, anesthetized by the 
on.
apparatus which serves him the ready-made images; now s/he has to work, to 
speak, in order to see.    
 
ever before. This can be seen clearly with the earliest VR system designed by 
Sutherland and his colleagues in the 1960s which I already mentioned above. 
According to Howard Rheingold's history of VR, "Sutherland was the first to 
propose mounting small computer screens in binocular glasses &mdash; far from an 
easy hardware task in the early 1960s &mdash; and thus immerse the user's point of 
view inside the computer graphic world."
 

 Rheingold further wrote:  

123

In order to change the appearance of the computer-generated graphics 
when the user moves, some kind of gaze-tracking tool is needed. Because 
the direction of the user's gaze was most economically and accurately 
measured at that time by means of a mechanical apparatus, and because 
the HMD [head-mounted display] itself was so heavy, the users of 
Sutherland's early HMD systems found their head locked into machinery 
suspended from the ceiling. The user put his or her head into a metal 
contraption that was known as the 'Sword of Damocles' display.
 

124

125

 The user was able to 

A pair of tubes connected the display to tracks in the ceiling, "thus making 

 
 
the user a captive of the machine in a physical sense."
turn around and rotate her/his head in any direction but s/he could not move away 
from the machine more than few steps. Like today's computer mouse, the body 
was tied to the computer. In fact, the body was reduced to nothing else &mdash; and 
nothing more &mdash; than a giant mouse, or more, precisely, a giant joystick. Instead 
of moving a mouse, the user had to turn her/his own body. Another comparison 
which comes to mind is the apparatus built in the late nineteenth century by 
Etienne-Jules Marey to measure the frequency of the wing movements of a bird. 
The bird was connected to the measuring equipment by wires which were long 
enough to enable it to flap its wings in midair but not fly anywhere.
 
The parodox of VR that requires the viewer to physically move in order to 
see an image (as opposed to remaining immobile) and at the same time physically 
ties her/him to a machine is interestingly dramatized in a "cybersex" scene in the 
movie Lawnmower Man (Brett Leonard, 1992). In the scene, the heroes, a man 
and a woman, are situated in the same room, each fastened to a separate circular 
frame which allows the body to freely rotate 360 degrees in all directions. During 
"cybersex" the camera cuts back and forth between the virtual space (i.e., what the 
heroes see and experience) and the physical space. In the virtual world 
represented with psychedelic computer graphics, their bodies melt and morph 

126

    

 

&#xC; 
111

together disregarding all the laws of physics, while in the real world each of them 
simply rotates within his/her own frame. 
 
The paradox reaches its extreme in one of the most long standing VR 
projects &mdash; the Super Cockpit developed by the U.S. Air Force in the 1980s.
 
Instead of using his own eyes to follow both the terrain outside of his plane and 
the dozens of instrument panels inside the cockpit, the pilot wears a head-
mounted display that presents both kinds of information in a more efficient way. 
What follows is a description of the system from Air & Space magazine:  
 

127

When he climbed into his F16C, the young fighter jock of 1998 simply 
plugged in his helmet and flipped down his visor to activate his Super 
Cockpit system. The virtual world he saw exactly mimicked the world 
outside. Salient terrain features were outlined and rendered in three 
dimensions by the two tiny cathode ray tubes focused at his personal 
viewing distance...His compass heading was displayed as a large band of 
numbers on the horizon line, his projected flight path a shimmering 
highway leading out toward infinity.

128

   

 
If in most screen-based representations (painting, cinema, video) as well as in 
typical VR applications the physical and the virtual worlds have nothing to do 
with each other, here the virtual world is precisely synchronized to the physical 
one. The pilot positions himself in the virtual world in order to move through the 
physical one at a supersonic speed with his representational apparatus which is 
securely fastened to his body, more securely than ever before in the history of the 
screen.   
 
 
Representation versus Simulation 
 
In summary, VR continues the screen's tradition of viewer immobility by 
fastening the body to a machine, while at the same time it creates an 
unprecedented new condition, requiring the viewer to move. We may ask whether 
this new condition is without an historical precedent or whether it fits within some 
other alternative representational tradition which encourages the movement of the 
viewer?   

I began my discussion of the screen by emphasizing that a screen's frame 

separates two spaces, the physical and the virtual, which have different scales. 
Although this condition does not necessarily lead to the immobilization of the 
spectator, it does discourage any movement on her part: why move when she can't 
enter the represented virtual space anyway? This was very well dramatized in 
Alice in Wonderland when Alice struggles to become just the right size in order to 
enter the other world.  

 

&#xC; 
112

To further analyze the different logic of the simulation and the 

The alternative tradition of which VR is a part can be found whenever the 

 
scale of a representation is the same as the scale of our human world so that the 
two spaces are continuous. This is the tradition of simulation rather than that of 
representation bound up to a screen. The simulation tradition aims to blend virtual 
and physical spaces, rather than to separate them. Therefore, the two spaces have 
the same scale; their boundary is de-emphasized (rather than being marked by a 
rectangular frame, as in representation tradition); and the spectator is free to move 
around the physical space. 
 
representation traditions we may compare their typical representatives: frescoes 
and mosaics, on the one hand, and the Renaissance painting. The former create an 
illusionary space that starts behind the surface of an image. Importantly, the 
frescoes, mosaics, and also wall paintings are inseparable from the architecture. In 
other words, they can&#x92;&rsquo;t not be moved anywhere. In contrast, a modern painting, 
which first makes its appearance during the Renaissance, is essentially mobile. 
Separate from a wall, it can be transported anywhere. (It is tempting to connect 
this new mobility of a representation with the tendency of capitalism to make all 
signs as mobile as possible. I will come back to this idea in &#x93;&ldquo;Teleaction&#x94;&rdquo; section 
of the next chapter.) 

But, at the same time, an interesting reversal takes place. The interaction 

with a fresco or a mosaic, which itself can't be moved, does not assume 
immobility on the part of the spectator, while the mobile Renaissance painting 
does presuppose such immobility. It is as though the imprisonment of the 
spectator is the price for the new mobility of the image. This reversal is consistent 
with the different logic of representation and simulation traditions. Since a fresco 
or a mosaic are &#x93;&ldquo;hardwired&#x94;&rdquo; to their architectural setting, this allows the artist to 
create the continuity between the virtual and the physical space. In contrast, the 
painting can be put in an arbitrary setting and therefore such continuity can no 
longer be guaranteed. Responding to this new condition, a painting presents a 
virtual space which is clearly distinct from the physical space where the painting 
and the spectator are located. At the same time, its imprisons the spectator 
through perspective model or other techniques, so she and the painting form one 
system. Therefore if in the simulation tradition the spectator exists in a single 
coherent space &#x97;&mdash; the physical space and the virtual space which continues it &#x97;&mdash; 
in the representational tradition the spectator has a double identity. She 
simultaneously exists in the physical space and in the space of the representation. 
This split of the subject is the tradeoff for new mobility of an image as well as for 
the newly available possibility to represent any arbitrary space, rather than having 
to simulate the physical space where an image is located. 

While representational tradition comes to dominate post-Renaissance 

culture, the simulation tradition does not disappear. In fact, the nineteenth 

 

&#xC; 
113

In this respect, nineteenth century panorama can be thought of as a 

VR continues the tradition of simulation. However, it introduces one 

century, with its obsession with naturalism, pushes simulation to the extreme with 
the wax museum and the dioramas of natural history museums. Another example 
of the simulation tradition is a sculpture on a human scale, for instance, Auguste 
Rodin's "The Burghers of Calais." We think of such sculptures as part of post-
Renaissance humanism which puts the human at the center of the universe, when 
in fact, they are aliens, black holes within our world into another parallel universe, 
the petrified universe of marble or stone, which exists in parallel to our own 
world.    
 
important difference. Previously, the simulation depicted a fake space which was 
continuous with and extended from the normal space. For instance, a wall 
painting created a pseudo landscape which appeared to begin at the wall. In VR, 
either there is no connection between the two spaces (for instance, I am in a 
physical room while the virtual space is one of an underwater landscape) or, on 
the contrary, the two completely coincide (i.e., the Super Cockpit project). In 
either case, the actual physical reality is disregarded, dismissed, abandoned. 
 
transitional form from classical simulations (wall paintings, human size sculpture, 
diorama) toward VR. Like VR, panorama creates a 360 degree space. The viewers 
are situated in the center of this space and they are encouraged to move around 
the central viewing area in order to see different parts of the panorama.
 But in 
contrast to wall paintings and mosaics which, after all, acted as decorations of a 
real space, the physical space of action, now this physical space is subordinate to 
the virtual space. In other words, the central viewing area is conceived as a 
continuation of fake space, rather than vice versa as before &mdash; and this is why it is 
usually empty. It is empty so that we can pretend that it continues the battlefield, 
or a view of Paris or whatever else the panorama represents.
 From here we are 
one step away from VR where the physical space is totally disregarded and all the 
"real" actions take place in virtual space. The screen disappeared because what 
was behind it simply took over.   
 
And what about the immobilization of  the body in VR which connects it 
to the screen tradition? Dramatic as it is, this immobilization probably represents 
the last act in the long history of the body's imprisonment. All around us are the 
signs of increasing mobility and the miniaturization of communication devices &mdash; 
mobile telephones and electronic organizers; pagers and laptops; phones and 
watches which offer Web surfing; Gameboy and similar hand held game units. 
Eventually VR apparatus may be reduced to a chip implanted in a retina and 
connected by wireless transmission to the Net. From that moment on, we will 
carry our prisons with us &mdash; not in order to blissfully confuse representations and 
perceptions (as in cinema), but to always "be in touch," always connected, always 
"plugged-in." The retina and the screen will merge.   

129

130

 

&#xC; 
114

 
This futuristic scenario may never become a reality. For now, we clearly 
live in the society of a screen. The screens are everywhere: the screens of airline 
agents, data entry clerks, secretaries, engineers, doctors, pilots, etc.; the screens of 
ATM machines, supermarket checkouts, automobile control panels, and, of 
course, the screens of computers. Rather than disappearing, the screen threatens to 
take over our offices, cities and homes. Both computer and television monitors are 
getting bigger and flatter; eventually to become wall-size. Architects such as Rem 
Koolhaus design &ldquo;Blade Runner&rdquo; like buildings where the whole fa&ccedil;ade is turned 
into a giant screen.

131

  

 Dynamic, real-time and interactive, a screen is still a screen. Interactivity, 

simulation, and telepresence: like centuries ago, we are still looking at a flat 
rectangular surface, existing in the space of our body and acting as a window into 
another space. Whatever new era we may be entering today, we still have not left 
the era of a screen. 

 

&#xC; 
115

 

III. The Operations 

 
 
Just as there is no &ldquo;innocent eye,&rdquo; there is no &ldquo;pure computer.&rdquo; A traditional artist 
perceives the world through the filters of already existing cultural codes, 
languages and representational schemes. Similarly, a new media designer or a 
user approaches the computer through a number of cultural filters. The preceding 
chapter discussed some of these filters. Human-computer interface models the 
world in distinct ways; it also imposes its own logic on digital data. Existing 
cultural forms such as printed word and cinema bring their own powerful 
conventions of organizing information. These forms further interact with the 
human-computer interface conventions to create what I called cultural interfaces 
&mdash; new sets of conventions used to organize cultural data. Finally, such constructs 
as screen (and the corresponding representation tradition along with its 
counterpart, the simulation tradition) contribute additional layer of conventions. 
 
The metaphor of a series of filters assumes that at each stage, from bare-
bones digital data to particular media applications, the creative possibilities are 
being further restricted. It is important therefore to note that each of these stages 
can be also seen as progressively more enabling. That is, although the 
programmer who would directly deal with binary values stored in memory would 
be as &ldquo;close to the machine&rdquo; as possible, it would also take forever to get the 
computer to do anything. Indeed, the history of software is one of increasing 
abstraction. By removing the programmer and the user further from the machine, 
software allows them to accomplish more faster - or, to use the early slogan of 
Apple, Inc., &ldquo;the power to be your best.&rdquo; From machine language programmers 
moved to Assembler, from there &mdash; to high level languages such as COBOL, 
FORTRAN and C, as well as very high level languages designed for 
programming in a particular area, such Macromedia Director&rsquo;s LINGO and 
HTML. The use of computers to author media developed along similar lines. If 
the few artists working with computers in the 1960s and 1970 had to write their 
own programs in high-level computer languages, beginning with the Macintosh 
most artists, designers and occasional users came to use menu-based software 
applications: image editors, paint and layout programs, Web editors. And while 
each of these programs comes with its built-in commands, default values, 
metaphors and interface conventions which strongly influence gets produced with 
their help, the evolution of software towards higher and higher levels of 
abstraction is fully compatible with the overall trajectory which governs 
computers development and use: automation.        

In this chapter I will take the next step in describing the language of new 

media. I started by analyzing the properties of computer data (Chapter 1), and 
then looked at the human-computer interface (Chapter 2). Continuing this bottom-

 

&#xC; 
116

up movement,  this chapter takes up the layer of technology which runs on top of 
the interface after  &mdash; application software. Software programs enable new media 
designers and artists to create new media objects &mdash; and at the same time they act 
as yet another filter which shapes their imagination of what is possible to do with 
a computer. Similarly, software used by end users to access these objects, such as 
Web browsers, image viewers or media players, shape their understanding of 
what new media is. For example, digital media players such Windows 98 Media 
Player or RealPlayer emulate the interfaces of linear media machines such as a 
VCR. They provide such commands as play, stop, eject, rewind and fast forward. 
In this way, they make new media simulate old media, hiding its new properties 
such as random access. 

Rather than analyzing particular software programs, I will address more 

general techniques, or commands, which are common to many of them. 
Regardless of whether a new media designer is working with quantitative data, 
text, images, video, 3D space or their combinations, she employs the same 
techniques: copy, cut, paste, search, composite, transform, filter. The existence of 
such techniques which are not media specific is another consequence of media 
status as computer data. I will call these typical techniques of working with 
computer media operations. This chapter will discuss three examples of 
operations: selection, compositing, and teleaction.  

While the operations are embedded in software, they are not tied up to it. 

They are employed not only within a computer but also in the social world outside 
of it. but also outside the computer. They are not only ways of working with 
computer data but also general ways of working, ways of thinking, and ways of 
existing in a computer age.  

The communication between the larger social world and software use and 

design is a two way process. As we work with software and use the operations 
embedded in it, these operations become part of how we understand ourselves, 
others and the world. The strategies of working with computer data become our 
general cognitive strategies. At the same time, the design of software and the 
human-computer interface reflects a larger social logic, ideology, and imaginary 
of the contemporary society. So if we find particular operations dominating 
software programs, we may also expect to find them at work in culture at large. In 
discussing the three operations of selecting, compositing and teleaction in the 
sections of this chapter I will illustrate this general thesis with particular 
examples. Other examples of operations which are imbedded in software and 
hardware and also can be found at work in contemporary culture at large are 
sampling and morphing.
 
As I already noted in &ldquo;Interface&rdquo; chapter, one of the differences between 
industrial and information society is that in the latter both work and leisure often 
involve the use of the same computer interfaces. This new, more close 
relationship between work and leisure is complimented by a more close 

132
 

 

&#xC; 
117

relationship authors and readers (or, more generally, between producers of 
cultural objects and their users). This does not mean that new media completely 
collapses the difference between producers and users, or that every new media 
text exemplifies Roland Barthes&rsquo; concept of &ldquo;readarly text.&rdquo; Rather, as we shift 
from industrial society to information society, from old media to new media, the 
overlapping between producers and users becomes much larger. This holds for 
software the two groups use, their respective skills and expertise, the structure of 
typical media objects, and the operations they perform on computer data.  

While some software products is aimed at either professional producers or 

end users, other software is used by both groups: Web browsers and search 
engines, word processors, media editing applications such as Photoshop (the latter 
routinely employed in post-production of Hollywood feature films) or 
Dreamweaver. Further, the differences in functionality and pricing between 
professional and amateur software are quite small (few hundred dollars or less) 
compared to the real gap between equipment and formats used by professionals 
and amateurs before new media. For instance, the differences between 35mm and 
8mm film equipment and cost of production, or between professional video 
(formats such as D-1 and Beta SP; editing decks, switchers, DVE, and other 
editing hardware) and amateur video (VHS) were in the hundreds of thousands of 
dollars.  Similarly, the gap in skills between professionals and amateurs also got 
smaller. For instance, while employing Java or DHTML for Web design in the 
late 1990s was the domain of professionals, many Web users were also able to 
create a basic Web page using such programs as FrontPage, HomePage or Word..  

At the same time, new media does not change the nature of professional-
amateur relationship. The gap became much smaller but it still exist. And it will 
always exist, systematically maintained by the professional producers themselves 
in order to survive. With photography, film and video, this gap involved three key 
areas: technology, skills, and aesthetics.
emerged. As the &ldquo;professional&rdquo; technology becomes accessible to amateurs, the 
new media professionals create new standards, formats and design expectations to 
maintain their status. Thus, the continuos introduction of new Web design 
&ldquo;features&rdquo; along with the techniques to create them following the public debut of 
HTML around 1993 &mdash; rollover buttons and pull-down menus, DHTML and 
XML, Javscript scripts and Java applets &mdash;  can be in part explained as the 
strategy employed by the professionals to keep themselves ahead of home users 

 With new media, a new area has 

133

On the level of new media products, the overlapping between the 

producers and the users can be illustrated by computer games. As I will discuss in 
more detail in &ldquo;Navigable Space&rdquo; section, game companies often release so-called 
&ldquo;level editors,&rdquo; the special software to allow the players to create their own game 
environments for the game they purchased. Other software to add or modify 
games is released by third parties or written by game fans themselves. This 
phenomenon is referred to as &ldquo;game patching.&rdquo; As described the writer and 

 

&#xC; 
118

curator Anne-Marie Schleiner, &ldquo;game patches, (or game add-ons, mods, levels, 
maps or wads), refer to the alterations of preexisting game source code in terms of 
graphics, game characters, architrecture, sound and game play. Game patching in 
the 1990s has evolved into a kind of popular hacker art form with numerous 
shareware editors available on the Internet for modifying most games.&rdquo;

134

 

Every commercial game is also expected to have an extensive &ldquo;options&rdquo; 
area where the player can customize various aspects of the game. Thus, a game 
player becomes somewhat of a game designer, although her creativity involves 
not making something from scratch but selecting combinations of different 
options. I will discuss this concept of creativity as selection in more detail in 
&ldquo;Menus, Filters, Plug-ins&rdquo; section.   

While some operations are the domain of new media professionals, and 

other operations are the domain of end users, the two groups also employ some of 
the same operations. The examples are copy, cut and paste, sort, search, filter, 
transcode, rip. The operations discussed in this chapter exemplify these three 
kinds. &ldquo;Selection&rdquo; is the operation employed by both professional designers and 
end users. &ldquo;Compositing&rdquo; is used exclusively belongs exclusively by the 
designers. The third operation, &ldquo;teleaction,&rdquo; is an example of operation typically 
used by users. 

Although this chapter focuses on new media operations, the concept of an 
operation can be used in relation to other technologically-based cultural practices. 
We can connect it to other more familiar terms such as  &ldquo;procedure,&rdquo; &ldquo;practice&rdquo; or 
&ldquo;method.&rdquo; At the same time, it would be a mistake to reduce the concept of an 
operation to such concepts as &ldquo;tool&rdquo; or &ldquo;medium.&rdquo; In fact, one of the assumptions 
underlying this book is that these traditional concepts do not work very well in 
relation to new media, and that we need new concepts such as an interface and 
operations. On the one hand, operations are usually in part automated,  the way 
traditional tools were not. On the other hand, like computer algorithms, they can 
be written down as series of steps, i.e. they exist as concepts before being 
materialized in hardware and software. In fact, most of new media operations, 
from morphing to texture mapping, from searching and matching to hyperlinking, 
begin as algorithms published in computer science papers; eventually these 
algorithms become commands of standard software applications. So, for instance, 
when the user applies a particular Photoshop filter to an image, the main 
Photoshop programs invokes a separate program which corresponds to this filter. 
The program reads in the pixel values, performs some actions of them, and writes 
modified values to the screen. 

Thus, operations should be seen as another case of the more general 

principle of new media &mdash; transcoding. Encoded in algorithms and implemented 
as software commands, operations exist independently from the media data to 
which they can be applied. The separation between algorithms and data in 
programming becomes the separation between operations and media data.     

 

&#xC; 
119

As an example of the operations in other areas of culture, consider 

architectural practice of Peter Eiseman. His projects use diffirent operations 
provided by CAD programs as the basis of the design of building&rsquo;s exterior and/or 
interior form. Eiseman systematically utilized the full range of computer 
operations available: extrusion, twisting, extension, displacement, morphing, 
warping, shifting, scaling, rotation, and so on.

135

 

Another example is provided by clothing design by Iseey Miyake. Each of 

136

his designs is a result of a particular conceptual procedure, translated into a 
technological process.
 For instance, Just Before (Spring/Summer 1998 
collection) is a gigantic role of identical dresses with suggested lines of 
demarcation already incorporated into the fabric. An individual dress can be cut 
out from the roll in a variety of possible ways. Dunes (Spring/Summer 1998 
collection) is based on the operation of shrinking. A model is cut two times larger 
than its final size; next patches and pieces of tape are fitted in the key places; 
finally it is shrinked down to size by dipping it into special solution. This creates a 
particular wrinkled texture except in the places protected by patches and tapes.  

Dunes exemplifies an important feature of operations: they can be 

combined together in a sequence. The (new media) designer can manipulate the 
resulting script, removing and adding new operations. This script exists separately 
from the data to which it can be applied. Thus, the script of Dunes consists from 
cutting the model; applying patches and tapes to key areas; and shrinking. It can 
be applied to different designs and fabrics. New media software, designers and 
users have even more flexibility. New filters can be &ldquo;plugged into&rdquo; the program, 
extending the range of operations available. The script can be edited using special 
scripting languages. It can be also saved and later applied to a different object. 
The designers and users can automatically apply the script to a number of objects 
and even instruct the computer to automatically invoke the script at a particular 
time or if particular condition as occurred. The example of the former are backup 
or disk defragmenter programs often designated to start at a particular time at 
night. The example of the later is filtering email messages in email programs such 
as Eudora or Microsoft Outlook. While retrieving new email messages from the 
server, the program can move email messages into a particular folder (or delete 
them, or raise their priority, etc.) if the message header or address contain a 
particular string. 

 
  

 

&#xC; 
120

 

Menus, Filters, Plug-ins 

139

140

137

138

 Macromedia Director 7 

 Softimage|3D (v3.8), the leading 3D modeling and animation 

 QuickTime 4 from Apple, a format for digital video, comes with 15 

 
 
The Logic of Selection 
 
Viewpoint Datalabs International is selling thousands 3D geometric models 
widely used by computer animators and designers. Its catalog describes the 
models as follows: "VP4370: Man, Extra Low Resolution. VP4369: Man, Low 
Resolution. VP4752: Man, Muscular in Shorts and Tennis Shoe. VP5200. Man, 
w/Beard, Boxer Shorts..."
  Adobe Photoshop 5.0 comes with more than 100 
filers which allow the user to modify an image in numerous ways; After Effects 
4.0, the standard for compositing moving images, is shipped with 80 effects plug-
ins; thousands more are available from third parties.
comes with an extensive library of &ldquo;behaviors&rdquo; &mdash; ready-to-use pieces of 
computer code.
software, is shipped with over 400 textures which can be applied to 3D 
objects.
built-in filters and 13 built-in video transitions.
pioneered the concept of hosting users&rsquo; Web sites for free in exchange for adding 
ad banners into users&rsquo; pages,  gives users access to a collection of over 40,000 
clip art images for customizing their sites.
stock photos available for use in Web banner ads.
Page Wizard lets the user to create a simple Web by selecting from eight pre-
determined styles described by such terms as &ldquo;Elegant,&rdquo; &ldquo;Festive&rdquo; and 
&ldquo;Professional.&rdquo; Microsoft Chat 2.1 asks the user to specify her avator by choosing 
among twelth built-in cartoon character. During the online session, the user can 
further customize the selected character by interpolating between eight values 
which represent eight fundamental emotions as defined by Microsoft 
programmers.  
 
These examples illustrate a new logic of computer culture. New media 
objects are rarely created completely from scratch; usually they are assembled 
from ready-made parts. Put differently, in computer culture authentic creation has 
been replaced by selection from a menu. In the process of creating a new media 
object, the designer selects from libraries of 3D models and texture maps, sounds 
and behaviors, background images and buttons, filters and transitions. Every 
authoring and editing software comes with such libraries. In addition, both 
software manufacturers and third parties sell separate collections which work as 
&ldquo;plug-ins,&rdquo; i.e. they appear as additional commands and ready-to-use media 

 Geocities Web site, which 

142

 Index Stock Imagery offers 375,000 

143

 Microsoft Word 97 Web 

141

 

&#xC; 
121

New media users are similarly asked to select from pre-defined menus of 

elements under software&rsquo;s menus. The Web provides a further source of plug-ins 
and media elements, with numerous collections available for free.  
 
choices when using software to create documents or access various Internet 
services. Here are few examples: selecting one of pre-defined styles when 
creating a Web page in Microsoft Word or a similar program; selecting one of 
&ldquo;AutoLayouts&rdquo; when creating a slide in PowerPoint; selecting one of pre-
determined avatars on entering a multi-user virtual world such as Palace; selecting 
one of the pre-determined viewpoints when navigating a VRML world. (Avatar is 
a character or a graphic icon representing a user in a virtual world.) 

All in all, selecting from a library or menu of pre-defined elements or 

choices is one of the key operations for both professional producers of new media 
and for the end users. This operation makes production process more efficient for 
the professionals; and it makes end users feel that they are not just consumers but 
&ldquo;authors&rdquo; creating a new media object or experience. What are the historical 
origins of this new cultural logic? How can we describe theoretically the 
particular dynamics of standardization and invention which comes with it?  Is the 
model of authorship it puts forward specific to new media or can we already find 
it work in old media? 

Art historian Ernst Gombrich and Roland Barthes, among others, critiqued 

144

 According to Gombrich, the realist artist can only represent nature by 

the romantic ideal of the artist creating totally from scratch, pulling images 
directly from his imagination, or inventing new ways to see the world all 
alone.
relaying on already established &ldquo;representational schemes&rdquo;; the history of illusion 
in art involves slow and subtle modifications of these schemes over many 
generations of artists. In his famous essay &ldquo;The Death of the Author,&rdquo; Barthes 
offered even more radical criticism of the idea an author as a solitary inventor 
alone responsible for work&rsquo;s content. As Barthes puts it, "the Text is a tissue of 
quotations drawn from the innumerable centers of culture."
modern artist may be only reproducing, or, at best, combining in new ways 
preexisting texts, idioms and schemas, the actual material process of art making 
supports the romantic ideal. An artist operates like God creating the Universe &mdash; 
she starts with an empty canvas or a blank page. Gradually filling in the details, 
he brings a new world into existence.  
 
appropriate for the age of pre-industrial artisan culture. In the twentieth century, 
as the rest of the culture moved to mass production and automation, literally 
becoming a "culture industry" (the term of Theodor Adorno), fine arts continued 
to insist on its artisan model. Only in the 1910s when some artists began to 
assemble collages and montages from already existing cultural "parts," the 
industrial method of production entered the realm of art. Photomontage became 
the most &ldquo;pure&rdquo; expression of this new method. By the early 1920s, 

Such a process of art making, manual and painstakingly slow, was 

 Yet, even though a 

145

 

&#xC; 
122

In contrast, electronic art from its very beginning was based on a new 

146

 In the 1960s video artists began to build 

Substitute a simple sine wave by a more complex signal (sounds, rhythms, 

photomontage practitioners already created (or rather, constructed) some of the 
most remarkable images of modern art  such as Cut with the Cake-Knife (Hannah 
H&ouml;ch, 1919), Metropolis (Paul Citro&euml;n, 1923), The Electrification of the Whole 
Country (Gustav Klutsis, 1920), and Tatlin at Home (Raoul Hausmann, 1920), to 
mention just a few examples. Yet, although photomontage became an established 
practice of Dadaists, Surrealists, and Constructivists in the 1920s, and Pop artists 
in the 1960s, the creation from scratch, as exemplified by painting and drawing, 
remained the main operation of modern art.    
 
principle: modification of an already existing signal. The first electronic 
instrument designed in 1920 by the Russian scientist and musician Leon 
Theremin contained a generator producing a sine wave; the performer simply 
modified its frequency and amplitude.
video synthesizers based on the same principle. The artist was no longer a 
romantic genius generating a new world purely out of his imagination; he became 
a technician turning a knob here, pressing switch there &mdash; an accessory to the 
machine.       
 
melodies); add a whole bank of signal generators and you have arrived at a 
modern music synthesizer, the first instrument which embodies the logic of all 
new media: selection from a menu of choices.  
 
The first music synthesizers appeared in the 1950s, followed by video 
synthesizers in the 1960s, followed by DVE (Digital Video Effects) in the late 
1970s &mdash; the banks of effects used by video editors; followed by computer 
software such as 1984 MacDraw that came with a repertoire of basic shapes. The 
process of art making has finally caught up with modern times. It has become 
synchronized with the rest of modern society where everything is assembled from 
ready-made parts; from objects to people's identities. The modern subject 
proceeds through life by selecting from numerous menus and catalogs of items &mdash; 
be it assembling an outfit, decorating the apartment, choosing dishes from a 
restaurant menu, or choosing which interest groups to join. With electronic and 
digital media, art making similarly entails choosing from ready-made elements: 
textures and icons supplied by a paint program; 3D models which come with a 3D 
modeling program; melodies and rhythms built into a music synthesis program.  
 
her or his own unique "tissue of quotations" was bubbling and shimmering 
somewhere below the consciousness, now it has become externalized (and greatly 
reduced in the process) &mdash; 2D objects, 3D models, textures, transitions, effects 
which are available as soon as the artist turns on the computer. The World Wide 
Web takes this process to the next level: it encourages the creation of texts that 
completely consist of pointers to other texts that are already on the Web. One 
does not have to add any original writing; it is enough to select from what already 

 While previously the great text of culture from which the artist created 

 

&#xC; 
123

The same logic applies to branching-type interactive new media objects. 

exists. Put differently, now anybody can become a creator by simply providing a 
new menu, i.e. by making a new selection from the total corpus available.  
 
In a branching-type interactive program, when the user reaching a particular 
object, she can select which branch to follow next by clicking a button or on the 
part of an image or by choosing from a menu. The visual result of making a 
choice is that is either a whole screen or its part(s) change. A typical interactive 
program of the 1980s and early 1990s was self-contained, i.e. it run on a computer 
which was not networked. In contrast to surfing the Web where it is very easy to 
move from one site to another,  the designers of self-contained programs could 
expect undivided attention from a user. Therefore it was safe to change the whole 
screen after a user makes a selection. The effect was similar to turning pages in a 
book. This book metaphor was promoted by first popular hypermedia authoring 
software &mdash; Apple&rsquo;s HyperCard (1987); a good example of its use can be found in 
the game Myst (Broderbund, 1993). Myst presents the player with still images 
which fill the screen. When the player clicking on the left or right parts of an 
image, it is replaced by another image. (For more on navigation in Myst, see 
&ldquo;Digital Cinema&rdquo; and &ldquo;Navigable Space&rdquo; sections below.) In the second part of 
the 1990s, as most interactive documents migrated to the Web and simultaneously 
became more complex, it became important to give all pages of the site a common 
identity and also visually display page&rsquo;s position in relation to the site&rsquo;s 
branching-tree structure. Consequently, with the help of such technologies such as 
HTML Frames, Dynamic HTML and Flash, interactive designers established  a 
different convention. Now parts of the screen, which typically contain company 
logo, top-level menus, and page&rsquo;s path, remain constant while other parts changed 
dynamically. (Microsoft and Macromedia sites provide good examples of this 
new convention.
) But regardless of whether making a selection leads the user 
to a whole new screen or only changes part(s)of it, the user still navigates through 
branching structure consisting from pre-defined objects. While more complex 
types of interactivity can be created by via a computer program which controls 
and modifies the media object at run time, the majority of interactive media uses 
fixed branching tree structures.    

147

It is often claimed that a user of a branching interactive program becomes 

its co-author: by choosing a unique path through the elements of a work, she 
supposedly creates a new work. But it is also possible to see the same process in a 
different way. If a complete work is a sum of all possible paths through its 
elements, then the user following a particular path only accesses a part of this 
whole. In other words, the user is only activating a part of the total work that 
already exists. Just as with the example of Web pages which consist from nothing 
but the links to other pages, here the user does not add new objects to a corpus, 
but only selects its subset. This is a new type of authorship which corresponds 
neither to pre-modern (before Romanticism) idea of providing minor modification 

 

&#xC; 
124

to the tradition nor to the modern idea (nineteenth and first part of the twentieth 
centuries) of a creator-genius revolting against it. It does, however, fit perfectly 
with the logic of advanced industrial and post-industrial societies, where almost 
every practical act involves choosing from some menu, catalog, or database. In 
fact, as I already noted when discussing interactivity in &ldquo;Principles of New 
Media&rdquo; section, new media is the best available expression of the logic of identity 
in these societies: choosing values from a number of pre-defined menus.  

How can a modern subject escape from this logic? In a society saturated 

with brands and labels, people respond by adopting minimalist aesthetics and 
hard-to-identify clothing style. Writing about an empty loft as an expression of 
minimalist ideal, architecture critic Herbert Muschamp points out that people 
&ldquo;reject exposing the subjectivity when one piece of stuff is prefered to another.&rdquo; 
The opposition between an the indvidualised inner world and objective, shared, 
objective, neutral world outside becomes reversed:  
 

The private living space has taken on the guise of objectivity: neutral, 
value-free, as if this were a found space, not an impeccably designed one. 
The world outside, meawhile, has become subjectified, rendered into a 
changing collage of pesonal whims and fancies. This is to be expected in a 
culure dominated by the distribution system. That system, exists, after all, 
not to make things but to sell them, to apeal to individual impulses, tastes, 
desires. As a result, the public realm has becime a collective repository of 
dreams and designs from which the self requires refuge.

148

    

 
How can one accomplishing the similar escape in new media? It can only be 
accomplished by refusing all options and customization, and ultimately refusing 
all forms of interactivity. Paradoxically, by followng an interactive path one does 
not construct a unique self but instead adopts already pre-established identitities. 
Similarly, chossing values from menu or customisng one&rsquo;s desktop or an 
aplication automatally makes one participate in the &ldquo;changing collage of personal 
whims and fancies&rdquo; mapped out and coded into software by the companies. Thus, 
short of using command-line interface of UNIX which can be though of an 
equivalent of minimalist loft in the realm of computing, I would prefer using 
Microsoft Windows exactly the way it was installed at the factory.  
 
 
&#x93;&ldquo;Postmodernism&#x94;&rdquo; and Photoshop  
 
As I noted in this chapter&rsquo;s introduction, computer operations encode existing 
cultural norms in their design. "The logic of selection" is a good example of this. 
But what was a set of social and economic practices and conventions now became 
encoded in the software itself. The result is a new form of control, soft but 

 

&#xC; 
125

149

 As film historian 

While computer software &ldquo;naturalizes&rdquo; the model of authorship as 

powerful. Although software does not directly prevent its users from creating 
from scratch, its design on every level makes it "natural" to follow a different 
logic: that of selection.   
 
selection from libraries of pre-defined objects, we can already find this model at 
work with old media, such as magic lantern slides shows.
Charles Musser points out, in contrast modern cinema where the authorship 
extends from pre-production to post-production but does not cover exhibition 
(i.e., the theatrical presentation of a film is completely standardized and does not 
involve making creative decisions), in magic lantern slide shows the exhibition 
was a highly creative act. Magic lantern exhibitioner was the in fact an artist who 
skillfully arranged a presentation of slides which he bought from the distributors. 
This is a perfect example of authorship as selection:  an author puts together an 
object from the elements which she herself did not create. The creative energy of 
the author goes into selection and sequencing of elements, rather than into their 
original design.  
 
technological logic of analog media strongly supports it. Stored using industrially 
manufactured materials such as film stock or magnetic tape, media elements can 
be more easily copied, isolated and assembled in new combinations. In addition, 
various media manipulation machines, such as a tape recorder and a film slicer, 
make the operations of selection and combination easier to perform,. In parallel, 
we witness the development of archives of various media which enable the 
authors to draw on already existing media elements rather than always having to 
record new elements themselves. For instance, in the 1930s German 
photojournalist Dr. Otto Bettmann started what latter became known as Bettmann 
Archive; at the time of its acquisition by Bill Gates&rsquo;s Corbis Corporation in 1995  
it contained 16 million photographs, including some of most frequently used 
images of this century. Similar archives were created for film and audio media. 
Using &ldquo;stock&rdquo; photographs, movie clips and audio recording become the standard 
practice of modern media production.  

Although not all modern media arts follow this authorship model, the 

To summarize: the practice of putting together a media object from 

already existing and commercially distributed media elements already existed 
with old media, but new media technology further standardizes it and makes it 
much easier to perform. What before involved scissors and glue now involves 
simply clicking on "cut&rdquo; and &ldquo;paste. And, by encoding the operations of selection 
and combination into the very interfaces of authoring and editing software, new 
media &ldquo;legitimizes&rdquo; them. Pulling elements from databases and libraries becomes 
the default; creating them from scratch becomes an exception. The Web acts as a 
perfect materialization of this logic. It is one gigantic library of graphics, 
photographs, video, audio, design layouts, software code and texts; and each and 

 

&#xC; 
126

every element is free since it can be saved to user&rsquo;s computer with a single mouse 
click.  

It is not accidental that the development of GUI which legitimized &ldquo;cut 

150

 As it 

and paste&rdquo; logic as well as media manipulation software such as Photoshop, 
which popularized plug-in architecture, took place during the 1980s &mdash; the same 
decade when contemporary culture became &ldquo;post-modern.&rdquo; In evoking this term I 
follow Fredric Jameson usage of post-modernism as &ldquo;a periodizing concept whose 
function is to correlate the emergence of new formal features in culture with the 
emergence of a new type of social life and a new economic order.&rdquo;
became apparent by the early 1980s for critics such as Jameson, culture no longer 
tried to &ldquo;make it new.&rdquo; Rather, endless recycling and quoting of the past media 
content, artistic styles and forms became the new &ldquo;international style&rdquo; and the 
new cultural logic of modern society. Rather than assembling more media 
recordings of reality, culture is now busy re-working, recombining and analyzing 
the already accumulated media material. Invoking the metaphor of Plato&rsquo;s cave, 
Jameson writes that post-modern cultural production &ldquo;can no longer look directly 
out of its eyes at the real word but must, as in Plato&rsquo;s cave, trace its mental images 
of the world on its confining walls.&rdquo;
found its perfect reflection in the emerging computer software of the 1980s which 
privileged the selection from already existing media elements over creating them 
from scratch. And at the same time, to large extent it is this software which made 
post-modernism possible. The shift of all cultural production to first electronic 
tools such as switchers and DVEs (1980s) and then to computer-based tools 
(1990s) greatly eased the practice of relying on old media content in creating new 
productions. It also made media universe much more self-referential, because 
when all media objects are designed, stored and distributed using a single 
machine &mdash; computer &mdash; it becomes much easier to borrow elements from already 
existing objects. Here again the Web became the perfect expression of this logic, 
since  new Web pages are routinely created by copying and modifying already 
existing Web pages. This applies both for home users creating their home pages 
and for professional Web, hypermedia, and game development companies.  
 
 
From Object to Signal 

 In my view, this new cultural condition 

151

  

Selecting ready-made elements which will become part of the content of a new 
media object is only one aspect of &ldquo;logic of selection.&rdquo; While working on the 
object, the designer also typically selects and applies various filters and &ldquo;effects.&rdquo; 
All these filters, be it manipulating image appearance, creating a transition 
between moving images, or  applying a filter to a piece of music, involve the 
same principle: algorithmically modifying the existing media object or its parts. 
Since computer media consist from samples which are represented in a computer 

 

&#xC; 
127

Although we can also find precursors to filter operations in old media (for 

as numbers, a computer program can access every sample in turn and modify its 
value according to some algorithm (see &ldquo;Principles of New Media,&rdquo; (2) and (3)). 
Most image filters work in this way. For instance, to add noise to an image, a 
program such as Photoshop reads in the image file pixel by pixel, adds a 
randomly generated number to the value of each pixel, and writes out a new 
image file. Programs can also work on more than one media object at once. For 
instance, to blend two images together,  a program reads in values of 
corresponding pixels from the two images; it then calculates a new pixel value 
based on the percentages of existing pixel values; this process is repeated for all 
the pixels. 
 
instance, hand colorization of silent film), they really comes into their own with 
the electronic media technologies. All electronic media technologies of the 
nineteenth and twentieth century are based on modifying a signal by passing it 
through various filters. These include technologies for real-time communication 
such as telephone; broadcasting technologies used for mass distribution of media 
products such as radio and television; and technologies to synthesize media, such 
as video and audio synthesizers which originate with the instrument designed by 
Theremin in 1920.  
 
electronic technologies represents a fundamental conceptual step towards 
computer media. In contrast to a permanent imprint in some material, a signal can 
be modified in real time by passing it through some filter(s). Moreover, in 
contrast to manual modifications of a material object, an electronic filter can 
modify the signal all at once. Finally, and most importantly, all machines for 
electronic media synthesis, recording, transmission and reception include controls 
for signal modification. As a result, an electronic signal does not have a singular 
identity &mdash; a particular state which is qualitatively different from all other possible 
states. Consider, for example, loudness control of the radio receiver or brightness 
control of an analog television set. They don&rsquo;t have any privileged values. In 
contrast to a material object, electronic signal is essentially mutable. 
This mutability of electronic media is just one step away from 

In retrospect, the shift from a material object to a signal accomplished by 

&ldquo;variability&rdquo; of new media (see &ldquo;Principles of New Media&rdquo; section.) As already 
discussed,  a new media object can exist in numerous versions . For instance, in 
the case of a digital image, we can change its contrast and color, blur or sharpen 
it, turn it into a 3D shape, use its values to control sound, and so on. But, to a 
significant extent, an electronic signal is already characterized by similar 
variability, because it can exist in numerous states. For example, in the case of a 
sine wave, we can modify its amplitude or frequency; each modification produces 
a new version of the original signal without  affecting its structure. Therefore, in 
essence, a television or radio signal are already new media. Put differently, in the 
progression from a material object to an electronic signal to computer media the 
first shift is more radical than the second. All that happens when we move from 

 

&#xC; 
128

analog electronics to digital computers is that the range of variations is greatly 
expanded. This happens because, firstly, modern digital computers separate 
hardware and software, and, secondly, because an object is now represented as 
numbers, i.e. it become computer data which can be modified by software. In 
short, a media object becomes &ldquo;soft&rdquo; &mdash; with all the implications contained in this 
metaphor.  

The experimental filmmaker Hollis Frampton whose reputation rests on 
his remarkable structural films and who, towards the end of his life, came to be 
interested in computer media, seemed to already understood this fundamental 
importance of the shift from a material object to an electronic signal.
in one of his essays:  
  

152

 He wrote 

Since the New Stone Age, all the arts have tended, through accident or 
design, toward a certain fixity in their object. If Romanticism deferred 
stabilizing the artifact, it nonetheless placed its trust, finally, in a 
specialized dream of statis: the 'assembly line' of the Industrial Revolution 
was at first understood as responsive to copious imagination. 

If the television assembly line has by now run riot (half a billion 

people can watch a wedding as consequential as mine or yours) it has also 
confuted itself in its own malleability. 

We're all familiar with the parameters of expression: Hue, 

Saturation, Brightness, Contrast. For the adventurous, there remain the 
twin deities Vertical Hold and Horizontal Hold&hellip;and, for those aspiring to 
the pinnacles, Fine Tuning.

153

 

 
What Frampton calls &ldquo;malleability&rdquo; of television signal becomes &ldquo;variability&rdquo; of 
new media. While the analog television set allowed the viewer to modify the 
signal on just a few dimensions such as brightness and hue, new media 
technologies give the user much more control. A new media object can be 
modified on numerous dimensions, and these modifications can be expressed 
numerically. For instance, the user of a Web browser software can instruct the 
browser to skip all multimedia elements; tell it to enlarge font size while 
displaying a page or to completely substitute the original font by a different one. 
The user can also re-shape the browser window to any size and proportions as 
well as change the spatial and color resolution of the display itself. Further, a 
designer can specify that different versions of the same Web site will be displayed 
depending upon the bandwidth of user&rsquo;s connection and the resolution of her 
display. For instance, a user accessing the site via a high-speed connection and a 
high resolution screen will get a rich multimedia version while the user accessing 
the same site via a small LCD display of a hand-held electronic will receive just a 
few lines of text. More radically, a number of completely different interfaces can 
be constructed to the same data, from a database to a virtual environment. In 

 

&#xC; 
129

short, the new media object is something which can exist in numerous versions 
and numerous incarnations.  
 
To conclude this discussion of selection operation, I would like to invoke 
a particular cultural figure &mdash; a new kind of author for whom this operation is the 
keys. This author is a DJ who creates music in real-time by mixing already 
existing music tracks and who is dependent on various electronic hardware 
devices. In the 1990s DJ acquired a new cultural prestige, becoming a required 
presence at art openings and book release parties, in hip restaurants and hotels, in 
the pages of Art Forum and Wired. The rise of this figure can be directly 
correlated to the rise of computer culture. DJ best demonstrates its new logic: 
selection and combination of pre-existent elements. DJ also demonstrates the true 
potential of this logic to create new artistic forms. Finally, DJ example also makes 
it clear that selection by itself is not sufficient. The essence of DJ&rsquo;s art  is the 
ability to mix the selected elements together in rich and sophisticated ways. In 
contrast to &ldquo;paste and cut&rdquo; metaphor of modern GUI which suggests that selected 
elements can be simply, almost mechanically combined, the practice of live 
electronic music demonstrates that true art lies in the &ldquo;mix.&rdquo;  
 

 

&#xC; 
130

 

Compositing  

 
 
From Image Streams to Modular Media 
 
The movie Wag the Dog (Barry Levinson, 1997) contains an scene in which a 
Washington spin doctor and a Hollywood producer are editing a fake news 
footage designed to win public support for the non-existent war. The footage 
shows a girl, a cat in her arms, running through the destroyed village. If a few 
decades earlier creating together such a shot required staging and then filming the 
whole thing on location, the computer tools make it possible to create it in real 
time. Now, the only live element is the girl, played by a professional actress. The 
actress is videotaped against a blue screen. The other two elements in the shot, the 
destroyed village and the car, come from the database of stock footage. Scanning 
through the database, the producers trying different versions of these elements; a 
computer updates the composite scene in real time.  

The logic of this shot is typical of new media production process, 

regardless of whether the object being put together is a video or film shot, as in 
Wag the Dog example; a 2D still image; a sound track; a 3D virtual environment; 
a computer game scene; or a sound track. In the course of production, some 
elements are created specifically for the project; others are selected from 
databases of stock material. Once all the elements are ready, they are composited 
together into a single object. That is, they are fitted together and adjusted in a 
such a way that their separate identities become invisible. The fact that they come 
diverse sources and were created by different people in different times is hidden. 
The result is a single seamless image, sound, space or a scene.  
 
and well-defined meaning. It refers to the process of combining a number of 
moving image sequences and possibly stills into a single sequence with the help 
of special compositing software such as After Effects (Adobe), Compositor 
(Alias|Wavefront), or Cineon (Kodak). Compositing was formally defined in a 
paper published in 1984 by two scientists working for Lucasfilm. In describing 
compositing they make a significant analogy with computer programming:  
 

As used in new media field, the term digital compositing has a particular 

Experience has taught us to break dwn large bodies of source code into 
separate modules in order to save compilation time. An error in one 
routine forces only the recompilation of its module and the relatively 
quick reloading of the entire program. Similarly, small errors in coloration 
or design in one object should not force &ldquo;recompilation&rdquo; of the entire 
image. 

 

 

&#xC; 
131

Separating the image into elements which can be independently rendered saves 
enormous time. Each element has an associated matte, coverage information 
which designates the shape of the element. The compositing of those elements 
makes use of the mattes to accumulate the final image.

154

 

Most often the composited sequence simulates a traditional film shot. That 
it, it looks like something which took place in real physical space and was filmed 
by a real film camera. To achieve this, all elements which comprise the finished 
composite &mdash; for example, footage shot on location, referred in the industry as a 
&ldquo;live plate,&rdquo; footage of actors shot in front of a blue screen, and 3D computer-
generated elements &mdash; are aligned in perspective, and modified so they have same 
contrast and color saturation. To simulate the depth of field of effect, some 
elements are blurred while others are sharpened. Once all the elements are 
assembled, a virtual camera move through the simulated space may be added to 
increase its &ldquo;reality effect.&rdquo; Finally, such artifacts as film grain or video noise can 
be added.  (See &ldquo;Illusion&rdquo; chapter for more detailed discussion of how 3D 
computer graphics is used in the service of traditional cinematic realism.) In 
summary, digital compositing can be broken into three conceptual steps:  
 
1.  Construction of a seamless 3D virtual space from different elements. 
2.  Simulation of a camera move(s) through this space (optional). 
3.  Simulation of the artifacts of a particular media (optional). 

 

If 3D computer animation is used to create a virtual space from scratch, 
compositing typically uses existing film or video footage. Therefore I need to 
explain why I claim the result of a composite is a virtual space. Let us consider 
two different examples of compositing. A compositor may use a number of 
moving and still images to create a totally new 3D space and then generate a 
camera move through it. For example, in Cliffhanger (Renny Harlin, 1993) the 
shot of the main hero, played by Silvester Stallone, which was filmed in the studio 
against a blue screen, was composited with the shot of a mountain landscape. The 
resulting shot shows Stallone high in the mountains hanging over an abyss.  In 
other cases, new elements will be added (or removed from) a live action sequence 
without changing neither its perspective nor the camera move. For example, a 3D 
computer generated creature can be added to a live action shot of an outdoor 
location, such as in many dinosaur shots in Jurassic Park (Steven Spielberg, 
special effects by Industrial Light & Magic, 1993) In the first example it is 
immediately clear that composited shot represents something which never took 
place in reality. In other words, the result of the composite is a virtual space. In 
the second example, it may appear at first that the existing physical space is 
preserved. However, here as well, the final result is a virtual world which never 
really existed. Put differently, what existed was a field of grass with trees without 
dinosaurs. 

 

&#xC; 
132

Digital compositing is routinely used to put together TV commercials and 

music videos, computer games scenes, shots in feature films and most other 
moving images in computer culture. Throughout the 1990s, Hollywood directors 
increasingly came to rely on compositing to assemble larger and larger part of a 
film. In 1999 George Lucas released Stars Wars: Episode 1 (1999); according to 
Lucas,  %95 of the film was assembled on a computer. As I will discuss below, 
digital compositing as a technique to create moving images goes back to video 
keying and optical printing in cinema; but what before was a rather special 
operation now become a norm for creating moving imagery. Digital compositing 
also greatly expanded the range of this technique, allowing to control the 
transparency of individual layers and to combine potentially unlimited number of 
layers. For instance, a typical special effects shot from a Hollywood film may 
consist from a few hundred, or even thousands of layers. Although in some 
situations a few layers can be combined in real time automatically (virtual sets 
technology), in general compositing is a time consuming and difficult operation. 
This is one aspect of compositing the scene from Wag the Dog misrepresented; to 
create the composite shown in this scene would require many hours.     
 
Digital compositing exemplifies a more general operation of computer 
culture: assembling together a number of elements to create a single seamless 
object. Thus we can distinguish between compositing in wider sense (i.e., the 
general operation) and compositing in a narrow sense (assembling movie image 
elements to create a photorealistic shot). The latter meaning corresponds to the 
accepted usage of the term compositing. For me, compositing in a narrow sense is 
a particular case of  a more general operation of compositing &mdash; a typical 
operation in assembling any new media object. 
 
typical new media object is put together from elements which come from different 
sources, these elements need to be coordinated and adjusted to fit together. 
Although the logic of these two operations &mdash; selection and compositing &mdash; may 
suggest that they always follow one another (first select, then composite), in 
practice their relationship is more interactive. Once an object is partially 
assembled, new elements may need to be added; existing elements may need to be 
re-worked. This interactivity is made possible by modular organization of a new 
media object on different scales (see &ldquo;Principles of New Media,&rdquo; (2)). Throughout 
the production process, the elements retain their separate identity and therefore 
they can be easily modified, substituted or deleted. When the object is complete, it 
can be &ldquo;output&rdquo; as a single &ldquo;stream&rdquo; in which separate elements no longer are 
accessible. The example of the operation which &ldquo;collapses&rdquo; all elements together 
is &ldquo;flatten image&rdquo; command in Adobe Photoshop 5.0. Another example of 
&ldquo;collapsing&rdquo; elements into a single stream is recording a digitally composited 
moving image sequence on film, which was a typical procedure in Hollywood 
film production in the 1980s and 1990s.  

As a general operation, compositing is a counterpart of selection. Since a 

 

&#xC; 
133

Alternatively, the completed object may retain the modular structure when 

it is distributed. For instance, in computer games the player can interactively 
control characters, moving them in space. In some games, the user moves 2D 
images of characters, called sprites, over the background image; in others, 
everything is represented as 3D objects, including the characters. In either case, 
during production the elements are adjusted to form a single whole, stylistically, 
spatially and semantically; during the play the user can move the elements within 
the programmed limits.  

In general, 3D computer graphics representation is more &ldquo;progressive&rdquo; 
than a 2D image because it allows true independence of elements; therefore it 
may gradually replace image streams, still used by our culture: photographs, 2D 
drawings, films, video. In other words, 3D computer graphics representation is 
more modular than 2D still image or 2D moving image stream. This modularity 
makes it easier for a designer to modify the scene at any time. It also gives the 
scene additional functionality. For instance, the user may &ldquo;control&rdquo; the character, 
moving him or her around the 3D space. Scene elements can be later reused for 
new productions. Finally, modularity also allows for a more efficient storage and 
transmission of a media object. For example, to transmit a video clip over a 
network all pixels which make up this clip have to be send over; but to transmit a 
3D scene only requires sending the coordinates of the objects in it. These is how 
online virtual worlds, online computer games and networked military simulators 
work: first the copies of all objects making up a world are downloaded to a user 
computer, and after this the server only has to keep sending their new 3D 
coordinates. 

If the general trajectory of computer culture is from 2D images towards 

3D computer graphics representations, digital compositing represents an 
intermediary historical step between the two. A composited space which consists 
from a number of moving image layers is more modular than a single shot of a 
physical space. The layers can be repositioned against each other and adjusted 
separately. Yet such a representation is not as modular as a true 3D virtual space, 
because each of the layers retains its own perspective. (In &ldquo;Digital Cinema&rdquo; 
section below I will discuss the newer post-production method in which digitized 
film or video sequences are positioned in a virtual computer generated space.) 
When and were moving image &ldquo;streams&rdquo; will be replaced by %100 3D computer 
generated scenes will depend not only on cultural acceptance of computer scene's 
look but also on economics. A 3D scene is much more functional than a film or 
video shot of the same scene but, if it is to contain similar level of detail, it may 
be much more expensive to generate. 

The general evolution of all media types towards becoming more and 

more modular, and the particular evolution of a moving image in the same 
direction, can be traced through the history of popular media file formats. 
QuickTime developers early on specified that a single QuickTime movie may 
consist from a number of separate tracks, just as a still Photoshop image consists 

 

&#xC; 
134

155

from a number of layers. QuickTime 4 format (1999) included 11 different track 
types, including video track, sound track, text track and sprite track (graphic 
objects which can be moved independently of video).
 By placing different 
media on different tracks which can be edited and exported independently, 
QuickTime encourages the designers to think in modular terms. In addition, a 
movie may contain a number of video tracks which can act as layers in a digital 
composite. By using alpha channels (masks saved with video tracks) and different 
modes of track interaction (such as partial transparency), QuickTime user can 
create complex compositing effects within a single QuickTime movie, without 
having to resort to any special compositing software. In effect, QuickTime 
architects embedded the practice of digital compositing in the media format itself. 
What previously required special software now can be done by simply using the 
features of QuickTime format itself. 

Another example of media format evolving towards more and more data 

 The early version of the format such as MPEG-1 (1992) 

modularity is MPEG.
was defined as &ldquo;the standard for storage and retrieval of moving pictures and 
audio on storage media.&rdquo; The format specified a compression scheme for a video 
and/or audio data conceptualized in a traditional way. In contrast, MPEG-7 (to be 
approved in 2001) is defined as &ldquo;the content representation standard for 
multimedia information search, filtering, management and processing.&rdquo;  It is 
based on different concept of a media composition which consist from a number 
of a media objects of various types, from video and audio to 3D models and facial 
expressions, and the information on how these objects are combined. MPEG-7 
provides an abstract language to describe such a scene. The evolution of MPEG 
thus allows us to trace the conceptual evolution in how we understand new media 
&mdash; from a traditional &ldquo;stream&rdquo; to a modular composition, more similar in its logic 
to a structural computer program than a traditional image or a film.  

156

The Resistance to Montage 
 
The connection between aesthetics of post-modernism and the operation of 
selection also applies to compositing. Together, these two operations reflect and 
at the same time enable "post-modern" practice of pastiche and quotation. They 
work in tandem: one operation is used to select elements and styles from the 
&ldquo;database of culture&rdquo;; another is to put them together into new objects. Thus, 
along with selection, compositing is the key operation of post-modern, or 
computer-based authorship. 

At the same time, we should  think of the aesthetic and the technological 

as aligned but ultimately separate layers, to use the metaphor of digital technology 
itself. The logic of the 1980s post-modern aesthetics and the logic of the 1990s 

    
 
 

 

&#xC; 
135

computer-based compositing are not the same. In the 1980s post-modern 
aesthetics, historical references and media quotes were kept as distinct elements; 
the boundaries between elements were well-defined (think of David Salle&rsquo;s 
paintings, Barbara Kruger&rsquo;s montages and various music videos.) Interestingly, 
this aesthetics corresponds to electronic and early digital tools of the period, such 
as video switchers, keyers, DVE (digital video effect devices), and computer 
graphics card which had limited color resolution. These tools enabled hard-edge 
&ldquo;copy and paste&rdquo; operation but not smooch, multi-layer composites. (A lot can be 
made out of the fact that one of the key post-modern artists of the 1980s, Richard 
Prince, who became well-known for his &ldquo;appropriation&rdquo; photographs, was 
operating one of the earliest computer-based photo editing system in the late 
1970s as a part of his commercial job, before he started making &ldquo;appropriation&rdquo; 
photographs.)  The 1990s compositing supported a different aesthetics 
characterized by smoothness and continuity. The elements were now blended 
together, and the boundaries were erased, rather than emphasized. This aesthetics 
of continuity can be best observed in television spots and special effects 
sequences of feature films which actually put together through digital compositing 
(i.e., compositing in the narrow, technical sense). For instance, the computer-
generated dinosaurs in Jurassic Park are made to perfectly blend with the 
landscape, just as the live actors, 3D virtual actors and computer-rendered ship are 
made to blend together in Titanic (James Cameron, special effects by Digital 
Domain, 1997). But the aesthetics of continuity can also be found in other areas of 
new media. Computer-generated morphs allow for a continuos transition between 
two images which before would be accomplished through a dissolve or a cut.
 
Many computer games also obey the aesthetics of continuity in that, in cinematic 
terms, they are single-takes. They have no cuts. From beginning to end, they 
present a single continuos trajectory through a 3D space. This is particularly true 
for first-person shooters such as Quake. The lack of montage in these games fits 
in with a first person point of view they employ. These games simulate the 
continuity of a human experience, guaranteed by the laws of physics. While 
modern telecommunication, from telegraph, telephone and television to 
telepresence and World Wide Web allowed us to suspend these laws, moving 
almost instantly from one virtual location to another with a tog of a switch or a 
press of a button, in RL (real life) we still obey physics: in order to move from 
one point to another we have to pass through every point in between. (I will 
investigate navigation through space as a key form of computer culture in 
&ldquo;Navigable Space&rdquo; section below.) 

157

All these examples &mdash; smooth composites, morphing, uninterrupted 

navigation in games &mdash;  have one thing in common: where old media relied on 
montage, new media substitutes the aesthetics of continuity. A film cut is replaced 
by a digital morph or by a digital composite. Similarly, the instant changes in time 
and space characteristic of modern narrative, both in literature and in cinema, are 

 

&#xC; 
136

replaced by a continuos non-interrupted first-person narrative of games and VR. 
Computer multimedia also does not use any montage. The desire to correlate 
between different senses, or, to use new media lingo, different media tracks, 
which preoccupied many artists throughout the twentieth century such as 
Kandinsky, Skriabin, Eisenstein, and Godard, to mention just a few well-known 
names, is foreign to multimedia. Instead it follows the principle of simple 
addition. The elements in different media are placed next to each other without 
any attempt to establish contrast, complementarity or dissonance between them. 
This is best illustrated by Web sites of the 1990s which typically contains JPEG 
images, QuickTime clips, audio files, and other media elements, side by side.  
We can also find strong anti-montage tendencies in modern GUI. In the 

middle of the 1980s Apple published guidelines for interface design of all 
Macintosh application software. According to these guidelines, an interface 
should communicate the same messages through more than one sense. For 
instance, an alert box appearing on the screen should be accompanied by a sound. 
This alignment of different senses can be compared to naturalistic use of different 
media in traditional film language, which was attacked by Eisenstein and other 
montage activists. Another example of anti-montage tendency in GUI is  peaceful 
co-existence of multiple information objects on the computer screen, exemplified 
by a number of simultaneously opened windows. Just as with media elements in a 
Web, the user can add more and more windows without establishing any 
conceptual tension between them. 

The aesthetics of continuity can&rsquo;t be fully deduced from compositing 

technology, although in many cases it would not be possible without it. Similarly, 
montage aesthetics which dominated much of modern art and media should not be 
thought of as a simple result of the available tools; but at the same time these 
tools, with their possibilities and limitations, contributed to its development. For 
instance, a film camera enables to shoot film footage of a certain limited length; 
to create a longer film the separate pieces have to be put together. This is typically 
in editing were the pieces are trimmed and then glued together. Not surprisingly, 
the modern film language is built on discontinuities: short shots replace one 
another; the point of view changes from shot to shot. The Russian montage school 
pushes such discontinuities to the extreme but, with a very few exceptions such as 
Andy Warhol&rsquo;s early films and Wavelength by Michael Snow, all film systems 
are based on them. 
  
In computer culture, montage is no longer dominant aesthetics, as it was 
throughout the twentieth century, from the avant-garde of the 1920s up until post-
modernism of the 1980s. Digital compositing in which different spaces are 
combined into a single seamless virtual space is a good example of the alternative 
aesthetics of continuity; however, compositing in general can be understood as a 
counterpart of montage aesthetics. Montage aims to create visual, stylistic, 
semantic, and emotional dissonance between different elements. In contrast, 
compositing aims to blend them into a seamless whole, a single gestalt. Since I 

 

&#xC; 
137

158

In discussing selection from a menu, I pointed out that this operation is 

already evoked DJ as somebody who exemplifies &ldquo;authoring by selection,&rdquo; I will 
use this figure once again as an example of how anti-montage aesthetics of 
continuity cuts across culture and is not limited to the creation of computer still 
and moving images and spaces. DJ&rsquo;s art is measured by his ability to seamlessly 
go from one track to another. A great DJ is thus a compositor and anti-montage 
artist par excellence. He is able to create a perfect temporal transition from very 
different musical layers; and he can do this in real time, in front of the dancing 
crowd.  
 
typical of both new media and culture at large. Similarly, the operation of 
compositing is not limited to new media. Consider, for instance, the frequent use 
of one or more layers of semi-transparent materials in contemporary packaging 
and architecture. The result is a visual composite, since a viewer can see both 
what is in front and what is behind the layer. It is interesting that one architectural 
project which explicitly refers to computer culture &mdash; The Digital House (Hariri & 
Hariri, project, 1988) &mdash; systematically employs such semi-transparent layers 
throughout.
 If in the famous glass house of Mies van de Rohe the inhabitant 
was looking outside through glass walls, the more complex plan of The Digital 
House creates the possibility of seeing through a number of interior spaces at 
once. Thus the inhabitant of the house is constantly faced with complex visual 
composites. 
 
Having discussed compositing as a general operation of new media and as 
a counterpart of selection, I will now focus on its particular case &mdash; compositing 
in the narrow sense, i.e. creation of a single moving image sequence from a 
number of separate sequences and (optionally) stills using special compositing 
software. Today digital compositing is responsible for an increasing number of 
moving images: all special effects in cinema, computer games, virtual worlds, 
most television visuals and even television news (see discussion of virtual sets 
below). Most often the moving image constructed through compositing presents a 
fake 3D world. I say &ldquo;fake&rdquo; because regardless of whether a compositor creates a 
totally new 3D space from different elements (Cliffhanger example), or only adds 
some elements to a live action footage (Jurassic Park example), the resulting 
moving image shows something which did not exist in reality. Digital 
compositing thus belongs together with other simulation techniques. These are the 
techniques used to create fake realities and thus, ultimately, to deceive the viewer: 
fashion and make up, realist painting, dioramas, military decoys and VR. Why 
digital compositing acquired such prominence? If we are to create an archeology 
which will connect digital compositing with previous techniques of visual 
simulation, there should we locate the essential historical breaks? Or, to ask this 
question differently: what is the historical logic which drives the evolution of 
these techniques? Shall we indeed expect computer culture to gradually abandon 

 

&#xC; 
138

pure lens-based imaging (still photography, film, video) replacing it instead with 
composited images and ultimately with 3D computer generated simulations? 
 
 
Archeology of Compositing: Cinema 
 
I will start my archeology of compositing with Potemkin's Villages. According to 
the historical myth, at the end of the eighteenth century, Russian ruler Catherine 
the Great decided to travel around Russia in order to observe first-hand how the 
peasants lived. The first minister and Catherine's lover, Potemkin, had ordered the 
construction of special fake villages along her projected route. Each village 
consisted of a row of pretty facades. The facades faced the road; at the same time, 
to conceal their artifice, they were positioned at a considerable distance. Since 
Catherine the Great never left her carriage, she returned from her journey 
convinced that all peasants lived in happiness and prosperity.   
 
This extraordinary arrangement can be seen as a metaphor for life in the 
Soviet Union where I grew up in the 1970s. There, the experience of all citizens 
was split between the ugly reality of their lives and the official shining facades of 
ideological pretense. However, the split took place not only on a metaphorical but 
also on a literal level, particularly in Moscow &mdash; the showcase Communist city. 
When prestigious foreign guests visited Moscow, they, like Catherine the Great, 
were taken around in limousines which always followed few special routes. Along 
these routes, every building was freshly painted, the shop windows displayed 
consumer goods, the drunks were removed, having been picked up by the militia 
early in the morning. The monochrome, rusty, half-broken, amorphous Soviet 
reality was carefully hidden from the view of the passengers.  
 
eighteenth century technique of creating fake reality. But, of course, the twentieth 
century brought with it a much more effective technology: cinema. By 
substituting a window of a carriage or a car with a screen showing projected 
images, cinema opened up new possibilities for simulation. 
 
example is the construction of a cinematic space. Traditional fiction film 
transports us into a space: a room, a house, a city. Usually, none of these exist in 
reality. What exists are the few fragments carefully constructed in a studio. Out of 
these disjointed fragments, a film synthesizers the illusion of a coherent space.  
 
The development of the techniques to accomplish this synthesis coincides 
with the shift in American cinema between approximately 1907 and 1917 from a 
so-called "primitive" to a "classical" film style. Before the classical period, the 
space of film theater and the screen space were clearly separated much like in 
theater or vaudeville. The viewers were free to interact, come and go, and 
maintain a psychological distance from the cinematic narrative. Correspondingly, 

Fictional cinema, as we know it, is based upon lying to a viewer. A perfect 

In turning selected streets into fake facades, Soviet rulers adopted 

 

&#xC; 
139

159

In contrast, classical Hollywood film positions each viewer inside the 

the early cinema's system of representation was presentational: actors played to 
the audience, and the style was strictly frontal.
 The composition of the shots 
also emphasized frontality.  
 
fictional space of the narrative. The viewer is asked to identify with the characters 
and to experience the story from their points of view. Accordingly, the space no 
longer acts as a theatrical backdrop. Instead, through new compositional 
principles, staging, set design, deep focus cinematography, lighting and camera 
movement, the viewer is situated at the optimum viewpoint of each shot. The 
viewer is "present" inside a space which does not really exist. A fake space.   
 
In general, Hollywood cinema was always careful to hide the artificial 
nature of its space, but there is one exception: rear screen projection shots which 
were introduced in the 1930s. A typical shot shows actors sitting inside a 
stationary vehicle; a film of a moving landscape is projected on the screen behind 
car's windows. The artificiality of rear screen projection shots stands in striking 
contrast against the smooth fabric of Hollywood cinematic style in general.   
 
The synthesis of a coherent space out of distinct fragments is only one 
example of how fictional cinema fakes reality. A film in general is comprised 
from separate image sequences. These sequences can come from different 
physical locations. Two consecutive shots of what looks like one room may 
correspond to two places inside one studio. They can also correspond to the 
locations in Moscow and Berlin, or Berlin and New York. The viewer will never 
know. 
 
be it eighteenth century Potemkin's Villages or nineteenth century Panoramas and 
Dioramas. Before cinema, the simulation was limited to the construction of a fake 
space inside a real space visible to the viewer. Examples include theater 
decorations and military decoys. In the nineteenth century, Panorama offered a 
small improvement: by enclosing a viewer within a 360-degree view, the area of 
fake space was expanded.  Louis-Jacques Daguerre introduced another innovation 
by having viewers move from one set to another in his London Diorama. As 
described by the historian Paul Johnson, its "amphitheater, seating 200, pivoted 
through a 73-degree arc, from one 'picture' to another. Each picture was seen 
through a 2,800-square-foot-window."
Potemkin had pushed this technique to its limit: he created a giant facade &mdash;  a 
Diorama stretching for hundred of miles &mdash; along which the viewer (Catherine the 
Great) passed. In cinema a viewer remains stationary: what is moving is the film 
itself.   
 
materiality of a viewer's body, existing in a particular point in space and time, 
film overcomes these spatial and temporal limitation. It achieves this by 
substituting recorded images for unmediated human sight and by editing these 

This is the key advantage of cinema over older fake reality technologies, 

Therefore, if the older simulation technologies were limited by the 

160

 But, already in the eighteenth century, 

 

&#xC; 
140

images together. Through editing, images that could have been shot in different 
geographic locations or in different times create an illusion of a contiguous space 
and time.    
 
Editing, or montage, is the key twentieth technology for creating fake 
realities. Theoreticians of cinema have distinguished between many kinds of 
montage but, for the purposes of sketching the archeology of the technologies of 
simulation leading to digital compositing, I will distinguish between two basic 
techniques. The first technique is temporal montage: separate realities form 
consecutive moments in time. The second technique is montage within a shot. It is 
the opposite of the first: separate realities form contingent parts of a single image. 
The first technique of temporal montage is much more common; this is what we 
usually mean by montage in film. It defines the cinematic language as we know it. 
In contrast, the montage within a shot is used more rarely throughout film history. 
An example of this technique is the dream sequence in The Life of an American 
Fireman by Edward Porter in 1903, in which an image of a dream appears over a 
man's sleeping head. Other examples include the split screens beginning in 1908 
which show the different interlocutors of a telephone conversation; 
superimposition of a few images and multiple screens used by the avant-garde 
filmmakers in the 1920&rsquo;s (for instance, superimposed images in Vertov&rsquo;s Man 
with a Movie Camera and a three-part screen in Gance Abel&rsquo;s 1927 Napol&eacute;on); 
rear screen projection shots; and the use of deep focus and a particular 
compositional strategies used to juxtapose close and far away scenes (for instance, 
a character looking through a window, such as in Citizen Kane, Ivan the Terrible 
and Rear Window.)
 
In a fiction film temporal montage serves a number of functions. As I 
already pointed out, it creates a sense of presence in a virtual space. It is also 
utilized to change the meanings of individual shots (recall Kuleshov's effect), or, 
more precisely, to construct a meaning from separate pieces of pro-filmic reality. 
However, the use of temporal montage extends beyond the construction of an 
artistic fiction. Montage also becomes a key technology for ideological 
manipulation, through its employment in propaganda films, documentaries, news, 
commercials and so on. The pioneer of this ideological montage is once again 
Vertov. In 1923 Vertov analyzed how he put together episodes of his news 
program Kino-Pravda (Cinema-Truth) out of shots filmed at different locations 
and in different times. This is one example of his montage: "the bodies of people's 
heroes are being lowered into the graves (filmed in Astrakhan' in 1918); the 
graves are being covered with earth (Kronshtad, 1921); gun salute (Petrograd, 
1920); eternal memory, people take down their hats (Moscow, 1922)." Here is 
another example: "montage of the greetings by the crowd and montage of the 
greetings by the machines to the comrade Lenin, filmed at different times."162 As 
theorized by Vertov, through montage, film can overcome its indexical nature, 

161

 

 

&#xC; 
141

After the World War II a gradual shift takes place from film-based to 

With electronic keying becoming a part of a standard television practice in 

presenting a viewer with objects which never existed in reality.           
 
 
Archeology of Compositing: Video 
 
Outside of cinema, montage within a shot becomes a standard technique of 
modern photography and design (photomontages of Alexander Rodchenko, El 
Lissitzky, Hannah H&ouml;ch, John Heartfield and countless other lesser-known 
twentieth century designers). However, in the realm of a moving image, temporal 
montage dominates. Temporal montage is cinema's main operation for creating 
fake realities.  
 
electronic image recording and editing. This shift brings with it a new technique: 
keying. One of the most basic techniques used today in any video and television 
production, keying refers to combining two different image sources together. Any 
area of uniform color in one video image can be cut out and substituted with 
another source. Significantly, this new source can be a live video camera 
positioned somewhere, a pre-recorded tape, or computer generated graphics. The 
possibilities for creating fake realities are multiplied once again. 
 
the 1970s, the construction of not only still but also of moving images finally 
begin to routinely rely on montage within a shot. In fact, rear projection and other 
special effects shots, which had occupied marginal presence in a classical film, 
became the norm: weather man in front of a weather map, an announcer in front 
of footage of a news event, a singer in front of an animation in a music video.    
 
An image created through keying presents a hybrid reality, composed of 
two different spaces. Television normally relates these spaces semantically, but 
not visually. To take a typical example, we may be shown an image of an 
announcer sitting in a studio; behind her, in a cutout, we see news footage of a 
city street. The two spaces are connected through their meanings (the announcer 
discusses events shown in a cutout), but visually they are disjoint, as they do not 
share neither the same scale nor perspective. If classical cinematic montage 
creates an illusion of a coherent space and hides its own work, electronic montage 
openly presents the viewer with an apparent visual clash of different spaces. 
 
What will happen if the two spaces seamlessly merge? This operation 
forms the basis of a remarkable video Steps directed by Polish born filmmaker 
Zbigniew Rybczynski in 1987. Steps is shot on video tape and uses keying; it also 
utilizes film footage and makes an inadvertent reference to virtual reality. In this 
way, Rybczynski connects three generations of fake reality technologies: analog, 
electronic and digital. He also reminds us that it was the 1920s Soviet filmmakers 
who first fully realized the possibilities of montage which continue to be explored 
and expanded by electronic and digital media.     

 

&#xC; 
142

The Odessa steps sequence, already a famous example of cinematic 

 
In the video, a group of American tourists is invited into a sophisticated 
video studio to participate in a kind of virtual reality / time machine experiment. 
The group is positioned in front of a blue screen. Next, the tourists find 
themselves literally inside the famous Odessa steps sequence from Sergei 
Eisenstein's Potemkin (1925). Rybczynski skillfully keys the shots of the people 
in the studio into the shots from Potemkin creating a single coherent space. At the 
same time, he emphasizes the artificiality of this space by contrasting the color 
video images  of the tourists with the original grainy black and white Eisenstein's 
footage. The tourists walk up and down the steps, snap pictures at the attacking 
soldiers, play with a baby in a crib. Gradually, the two realities begin to interact 
and mix together: some Americans fall down the steps after being shot by the 
soldiers from Eisenstein's sequence; a tourist drops an apple which is picked up 
by a soldier.  
 
montage, becomes just one element in a new ironic re-mix by Rybczynski. The 
original shots which were already edited by Eisenstein are now edited again with 
video images of the tourists, using both temporal montage and montage within a 
shot, the latter done through video keying. A "film look" is juxtaposed with 
"video look," color is juxtaposed with black and white, the "presentness" of video 
is juxtaposed with the "always already" of film.  
 
In "Steps" Eisenstein's sequence becomes a generator for numerous kinds 
of juxtapositions, super-impositions, mixes and re-mixes. But Rybczynski treats 
this sequence not only as a single element of his own montage but also as a 
singular, physically existing space. In other words, the Odessa steps sequence is 
read as a single shot corresponding to a real space, a space which could be visited 
like any other tourist attraction.   
 
experimented with the possibilities of electronic montage within a shot is Jean-
Luk Godard. While in the 1960s Godard was actively exploring new possibilities 
of temporal montage such as jump cut, in later video works such as Sc&eacute;nario du 
film &lsquo;Passion&rsquo; (1982) and Histore(s) du cin&eacute;ma (1989-) he developed an unique 
aesthetics of continuity which relies on electronically mixing a number of images 
together within a single shot. If  Rybczynski&rsquo;s aesthetics is based on the operation 
of video keying, Godard&rsquo;s aesthetics similarly relies on  a single operation 
available to any video editor: mixing. Godard uses the electronic mixer to create 
very slow cross-dissolves between images, cross-dissolves which seem never to 
resolve in a singular image, ultimately becoming the film itself. In Histore(s) du 
cin&eacute;ma, Godard mixes together two, three or more images; images gradually fade 
in and out, but never disappear completely, staying on the screen for a few 
minutes at a time. This technique can be interpreted as representation of ideas or 
mental images floating around in our minds, coming in and out of the mental 
focus. Another variation of the same technique used by Godard is to move from 
one image to another by oscillating between the two. The images flicker back and 

Along with Rybczynski, another filmmaker who systematically 

 

&#xC; 
143

 

 163

Godard wrote: "There are no more simple images... The whole world is 

forth over and over, until the second image finally replaces the first. This 
technique can be also interpreted as an attempt to represent mind's movement  
from one concept, mental image or memory to another &mdash; the attempt, in other 
words, to represent what, according to Locke and other associationist 
philosophers, is the basis of our mental life &mdash; forming associations. 
 
too much for an image. You need several of them, a chain of images..."
Accordingly, Godard always multiple images, images cross-dissolved together, 
coming together and separating. The electronic mixing that replaces both 
temporal montage and montage within the shot becomes for Godard an 
appropriate technique to visualize this &ldquo;vague and complicated system that the 
whole world is continually entering and watching.&rdquo;
 
 
Digital Compositing 
 
The next generation in simulation technologies is digital compositing. On first 
glance, computers do not bring any conceptually new techniques for creating fake 
realities. They simply expand the possibilities of joining together different image 
within one shot. Rather than keying together images from two video sources, we 
can now composite an unlimited number of image layers. A shot may consist of 
dozens, hundreds, or thousands of image layers. These image may all have 
different origins: film shot on location (&ldquo;live plates&rdquo;), computer-generated sets or 
virtual actors, digital matte paintings, archival footage, and so on. Following the 
success of Terminator 2 and Jurassic Park, most Hollywood films came to utilize 
digital compositing to create a least some of their shots.   

164

 

Thus historically, a digitally composed image, like an electronically keyed 

But this historical continuity is deceiving. Digital compositing does 

image, can be seen as a continuation of montage within a shot. But while 
electronic keying creates disjoined spaces reminding us of the avant-garde 
collages of Rodchenko or Moholy-Nagy from the 1920s, digital composing brings 
back the nineteenth century techniques of creating smooth "combination prints" 
like those of Henry Peach Robinson and Oscar G. Reijlander. 
 
represent a qualitatively new step in the history of visual simulation because it 
allows the creation of moving images of non-existent worlds. Computer generated 
characters can move within real landscapes; conversely, real actors can move and 
act within synthetic environments. In contrast to nineteenth century "combination 
prints" which emulated academic painting, digital composites simulate the 
established language of cinema and television. Regardless of the particular 
combination of live action elements and computer-generated elements which 
make up the composited shot, the camera can pan, zoom, and dolly through it. 
The interactions of the elements of the virtual world over time between 

 

&#xC; 
144

165

 In contrast, although images of such complexity were out of reach for 

themselves (for instance, the dinosaur attacking the car) along with the ability to 
look at it from different viewpoints become the guarantee of its authenticity.   
 
These new abilities to create a virtual world which moves &mdash; and to be 
able to move through it &mdash;come at a price. Although in the scene from Wag the 
Dog compositing the fake news footage took place in real time, in reality aligning 
together numerous elements to create a convincing composite is a time-
consuming task. For instance, a 40 second sequence from Titanic in which the 
camera flies over the computer-generated ship populated by computer-generated 
characters took many months to produce and its total cost was 1.1 million 
dollars.
video keying, it was possible to use it to combine three image sources in real-
time. (This trade-off between image construction time and its complexity is 
similar to another trade-off I already noted above: between image construction 
time and its functionality. That is, images created with 3D computer graphics are 
more functional than image streams recorded by film or video cameras, but in 
most cases they are much more time consuming to generate.)    
 
If a compositor restricts the composite to just a few images, as it was done 
with electronic keying, compositing can also be created in real time. The resulting 
illusion of a seamless space is stronger that what was possible with electronic 
keying. The example of real-time compositing is Virtual Sets technology which 
was first introduced in the early 1990s and since them has been making its way 
into television studios around the world. This technology allows to composite 
video image and computer-generated three-dimensional elements on the fly. 
(Actually, because the generation of computer-elements is computation intensive, 
the final image transmitted to the audience may be a  seconds behind the original 
image picked by television camera.) The typical application of Virtual Sets 
involves composing an image of an actor over a computer-generated set. The 
computer reads the position of the video camera and uses this information to 
render the set in proper perspective. The illusion is made more convincing by 
generating shadows and/or reflections of the actor and integrating them into the 
composite. Because of the relatively low resolution of analog television, the 
resulting effect is quite convincing. A particularly interesting application of 
Virtual Sets is replacement and insertion of arena-tied advertising messages 
during live TV broadcasts of sports and entertainment events. Computer-
synthesized advertising messages can be inserted onto the playing field or other 
empty areas in the arena in the proper perspective, as though they were actually 
present in physical reality.
 
techniques for visual deception yet for another reason. Throughout the history of 
representation, artists and designers focused on the problem of creating a 
convincing illusion within a single image, be it a painting, a film frame or a view 
seen by Catherine the Great through the window of her carriage. Set making, one-

Digital compositing represents a fundamental break with previous 

166

  

 

&#xC; 
145

point perspective, chiaroscuro, trick photography and other cinematography 
techniques were all developed to solve this problem. Film montage introduced a 
new paradigm: creating an effect of presence in a virtual world by joining 
different images over time. Temporal montage became the dominant paradigm for 
visual simulation of non-existent spaces.  
As the examples of digital composing for film and Virtual Sets applications for 
television demonstrate, the computer era introduces a different paradigm. This 
paradigm is concerned not with time but with space. It can be seen as the next 
step in the development of techniques for creating a single convincing image of 
non-existent spaces: painting, photography, cinematography. Having mastered 
this task, the culture came to focus on how to seamlessly join a number of such 
images into one coherent whole (electronic keying, digital compositing.) Whether 
it is composing a live video of a newscaster with a 3D computer generated set or 
composing thousands of elements to create images of "Titanic," the main problem 
is no longer how to generate convincingly looking individual images but how to 
blend them together. Consequently, what is important now is what happens on the 
edges where different images are joined. The borders where different realities 
come together is the new arena where Potemkins of our era try to outdo one 
another. 
 
 
Compositing and New Types of  Montage 
 
In the beginning of this section I pointed out that the use of digital compositing to 
create continuos  spaces out of different elements can be seen as an example of 
larger anti-montage aesthetics of computer culture. Indeed, if in the beginning of 
the twentieth century cinema discovered that it can simulate a single space 
through temporal montage &mdash;  a time-based mosaics of different shots &mdash; in the 
end of the century it came with the technique to accomplish the similar result 
without montage. In digital compositing, the elements are not juxtaposed but 
blended, with their boundaries erased rather than foregrounded.     

At the same time, by relating digital compositing to theory and practice of 

film montage, we can better understand how this new key technique of 
assembling moving images redefines our concepts of a moving image (in &ldquo;Digital 
Cinema&rdquo; I will offer another conceptualization of a digital moving image, arrived 
at through a different historical trajectory.) While traditional film montage 
privileges temporal montage over montage within a shot  &mdash; because technically 
the later was much more difficult to achieve &mdash; compositing makes them equal. 
More precisely, it erases the strict conceptual and technical separation between 
the two. Consider, for instance, the interface layout typical of many programs for 
computer-based editing and digital compositing, such as Adobe Premiere 4.2, a 
popular editing program, and Alias|Wavefront Composer 4.0, a professional 

 

&#xC; 
146

compositing program. In this interface, the horizontal dimension represents time, 
while the vertical dimension represents spatial order of different image layers 
making up each image. A moving image sequence appears as a number of blocks 
staggered vertically, with each block standing for a particular image layer. Thus if 
Pudovkin, one of Russian film montage theorists and practitioners of the 1920s,  
conceived of  montage as a one-dimensional line of bricks, now it becomes a 2D 
brick wall. This interface makes montage in time and montage within a shot equal 
in importance. 

If Premiere interface conceptualizes editing as an operation in 2D 

dimensions, the interface of one of the most popular compositing programs, After 
Effects 3.0, adds a third dimension. Following the conventions of traditional film 
and video editing, Premiere assumes that all image sequences are the same size 
and proportions; in fact, it makes working with images which do not conform to 
the standard 3 by 4 frame ratio rather difficult. In contrast, the user of After 
Effects places image sequences of arbitrary sizes and proportions within the larger 
frame. Breaking with the conventions of old moving image media, the interface of 
After Effects assumes that the individual elements making up a moving image can 
freely move, rotate and change proportions over time. 

Serge Einstein already used the metaphor of many-dimensional space in 

168

167

 When 

his writings on montage, naming one of his articles &ldquo;The Filmic Forth 
Dimension&rdquo; (&ldquo;Kino cheturekh izmereneii&rdquo;).
 However, his theories of montage 
ultimately focused on one dimension &mdash; time. Eisenstein formulated a number of 
principles, such as counterpoint, which can be used to coordinate the changes in 
different visual dimensions over time. The examples of visual dimensions he 
considered are graphic directions, volumes, masses, space, and contrast.
the sound film became a possibility, Eisenstein extended these principles to 
handle what, in computer language, can be called  synchronization of visual and 
 Eisenstein also 
audio tracks; and later he added the dimension of color.
developed a different set of principles (&ldquo;methods of montage&rdquo;) according to 
which different shots can be edited together to form a longer sequence. The 
examples of &ldquo;methods of montage&rdquo; include metric montage which uses absolute 
lengths of shots to establish a &lsquo;beat,&rdquo; and rhythmic montage based on pattern of 
movement within the shots. These methods can be used by themselves to structure 
a sequence of shots, but they also can be combined within a single sequence.   
The new logic of a digital moving image contained in the operation of 
compositing runs against Einstein's aesthetics with its focus on time. Digital 
compositing makes the dimensions of space (3D fake space being created by a 
composite and 2&frac12; D space of all the layers being composited) and frame (separate 
images moving in 2D within the frame) as important as time. In addition, the 
possibility of imbedding hyperlinks within a moving sequence introduced in 
170
QuickTime 3 and other digital formats adds yet another spatial dimension.

 The 

169

 

&#xC; 
147

typical use of hyperlinking in digital movies it to link elements of a movie with 
information displayed outside of it. For instance, when a particular frame is 
displayed, a specific Web page can be loaded in another window. This practice 
&ldquo;spatializes&rdquo; moving image: no longer completely filling a screen, it is now just 
one window among others. makes moving image hyperlinking spatial as well.  
In summary, if film technology, film practice and film theory privileged 
the temporal development of a moving image, computer technology spatializes 
moving image making time just one dimension among a number of others. The 
new spatial dimensions can be defined as follows: 

   

1.  Spatial order of layers in a composite (2 1/2 space). 
2.  Virtual space constructed trough compositing (3D space). 
3.  2D movement of layers in relation to the image frame (2D space). 
4.  The relationship between moving image and the linked information in the 

adjustment windows (2D space). 

 
These dimensions should be added to the list of visual and sound dimensions of 
the moving image, elaborated by Eistenstein and other filmmakers. Their use 
opens new possibilities for cinema as well as a new challenge for film theory. No 
longer just a subset of audio-visual culture, digital moving image becomes a part 
of audio-visual-spatial culture.  

171

 Thus, in order to &ldquo;qualify&rdquo; as an example of montage, a new media 

Of course, the simple use of these dimensions by itself does not result in 
montage. Most images and spaces of contemporary culture are juxtaposition of 
different elements; calling any such juxtaposition montage will render the term 
meaningless. Media critic and historian Erkki Hutamo suggested that we should 
reserve the use of the term for &ldquo;strong&rdquo; cases, and I will follow his suggestion 
here.
object should fulfill two conditions: the juxtapositions of elements should follow 
a particular system; and these juxtapositions should play key role in how the work 
establishes its meaning, emotional and aesthetic effect. These conditions would 
also apply to the particular case of new spatial dimensions of a digital moving 
image. By establishing a logic which controls the changes and the correlation of 
values on these dimensions, digital filmmakers can create what I will call spatial 
montage.  In the section &ldquo;New Language of Cinema&rdquo; below I will continue the 
discussion of spatial montage by analysing two concrete examples: a CD-ROM 
and a Web site.   

While the dominant use of digital compositing is to create a seamless 

virtual space, it does not have to be subordinated to this goal. The borders 
between different worlds do not have to be erased; the different spaces do not 
have to be matched in perspective, scale and lighting; the individual layers can 
retain their separate identity rather then being merged into a single space; the 
different worlds can clash semantically rather than form a single universe. I will 

 

&#xC; 
148

conclude this section by invoking a few more works, which, together with videos 
by Rybczynski and Godard, point at the new aesthetic possibilities of digital 
compositing if it is not used in the service of simulation. Although all these works 
were created before digital compositing became available, they explore its 
aesthetic logic &mdash; for compositing is not just a technological but first of all a 
conceptual operation. I will use these works to introduce two other montage 
methods based on compositing: ontological montage and stylistic montage.    

Rybczynski&rsquo;s film Tango (1982) made when he was still living in Poland 

uses layering as a metaphor for the particular overcrowdness characteristic of 
Socialist countries in the second part of the twentieth century, and for human co-
habitation in general. A number of people perform various actions moving in 
loops through the same small room, apparently unaware of each other. 
Rybczynski offsets the loops in such a way that even though his characters keep 
moving through the same points in space, they never run into another. 
Compositing, achieved in Tango through optical printing, allows the filmmaker to 
superimpose a number of elements, or whole words, within a single space. (In this 
film each person moving through the room can be said to form a separate world.) 
As in Steps, these worlds are matched in perspective and scale&mdash; and yet the 
viewer knows that the scene being shown either could not occur in normal human 
experience at all given the laws of physics, or is highly unlikely to occur given the 
conventions of human life. In the case of Tango, while the depicted scene could 
have occurred physically, the probability of it actually occurring is close to zero. 
Works such as Tango and Steps develop what I will call an ontological montage: 
the co-existence of ontologically incompatible elements within the same time and 
space.   
 
method based on compositing which I will call stylistic montage. In a career 
which spanned from the 1940s to the 1980s Zeman used a variety of special effect 
techniques to create juxtapositions of stylistically diverse images in different 
media. Zeman juxtaposes different media both in time, cutting from a live action 
shot to a shot of a model or documentary footage, and within the same shot. For 
example, a shot may combine filmed human figures, an old engraving used for 
background, and a model. Of course, such artists as Picasso, Braque, Picabia and 
Max Ernst were creating similar juxtaposition of elements in different media in 
still images already before the World War II. However, in the realm of a moving 
image stylistic montage only came to the surface in the 1990s when the computer 
became the meeting ground for different generations of media formats used in the 
twentieth century &mdash; 35 mm and 8 mm film, amateur and professional video, and 
early digital film formats. While previously filmmakers usually worked with a 
single format throughout the whole film, the accelerated replacement of different 
analog and digital formats since the 1970s made the co-existence of stylistically 
diverse elements a norm rather than exemption for new media objects. 
Compositing can be used to hide this diversity &mdash; or it can be used to foreground 

The films of Czech filmmaker Konrad Zeman exemplify another montage 

 

&#xC; 
149

it, as well as to create it artificially. For instance, the film Forest Gump strongly 
emphasizes stylistic differences between various shots; this simulation of different 
film and video artifacts is an important aspect of its narrative system.      

In Zeman's films such as Baron Pr&aacute;sil (&ldquo;Baron Muchhausen,&rdquo; 1961) and 
Na komete (&ldquo;On the Comet,&rdquo; 1970), live action footage, etchings, miniatures and 
other elements are layered together in self-conscious and ironic way. Like 
Rybczynski, Zeman keeps the coherent perspectival space in his films while 
making us aware that it is constructed. One of his devices is to superimpose 
filmed actors over an old etching used as a background. In Zeman&rsquo;s aesthetics 
neither graphic nor cinematographic dominate; the two are blended together in 
equal proportion creating a unique visual style. At the same time, Zeman 
subordinates the logic of feature filmmaking to the logic of animation. That is, the 
shots in his films which combine live action footage with graphic elements 
position all elements on parallel planes; the elements move parallel to the screen. 
This is the logic of an animation stand where the stack of images is arranged 
parallel to each other, rather than of live action cinema where the camera typically 
moves through 3D space. As we will see in &ldquo;Digital Cinema&rdquo; section, this 
subordination of live action to animation is the logic of digital cinema in general.  

Young St. Petersburg artist Olga Tobreluts, who does use digital 

compositing, also respects the illusion of a coherent perspectival space, while 
continuously playing tricks with it. In "Gore ot Uma"(1994; directed by Olga 
Komarova), a video work based on a famous play written by the nineteenth 
century Russian writer Aleksandr Griboedov, Tobreluts overlays images 
representing radically different realities (a close-up of plants; animals in the Zoo) 
on the windows and walls of various interior spaces. In one shot, two characters 
converse in front of a window behind which we see a flock of soaring birds taken 
from Alfred Hitchcock's "The Birds"; in another, a delicate computer- rendered 
design keeps morphing on the wall behind a dancing couple. In these and similar 
shots Tobreluts aligns the two realities in perspective but not in scale. The result 
is an ontological montage &mdash; and also a new kind of montage within a shot. 
Which is to say, if the 1920s avant-garde, and MTV in its wake, juxtaposed 
radically different realities within a single image, and if Hollywood digital artists 
use computer compositing to glue different images into a seamless illusionistic 
space (for instance, synthetic dinosaurs composited against filmed landscape in 
"Jurassic Park"), Zeman, Rybczynski and Tobreluts explores the creative space 
between these two extremes. This space in between modernist collage and 
Hollywood cinematic realism is a new direction for cinema ready to be further 
explored with the help of digital compositing. 
 
 

 

&#xC; 
150

Teleaction 

 
 
Representation versus Communication 
 
Teleaction, the third operation which I will discuss in this chapter, may appear to 
be qualitatively different from the first two, selecting and compositing. It is not 
employed to create new media, but only to access it. Therefore that we may at 
first think that teleaction does not have a direct effect on the language of new 
media.  

Of course, this operation is made possible by the designers of computer 
hardware and software. For instance, numerous Web cameras allow the users to 
observe remote locations; most Web sites also include hyperlinks which allow the 
user to &#x93;&ldquo;teleport&#x94;&rdquo; from one remote server to another. At the same time, in the case 
of many commercial sites, a designers aims to try to prevent a user from leaving 
the site for as long as possible. To use the industry lingo (circa 1999), a designer 
wants to make each user &#x93;&ldquo;hardcore&#x94;&rdquo; (making the user stay on the site); the goal of 
commercial Web design is to create &#x93;&ldquo;stickness&#x94;&rdquo; (a measure of how long an 
individual user stays on a particular Web site), and to increase &#x93;&ldquo;eyeball hang 
time&#x94;&rdquo; (Web-site royalty). So while it is the end user who is employing the 
operation of teleaction, it is the designer who makes it (im)possible. Still, no new 
media objects are being generated when the user folows a hyperlink to another 
Web site, or uses telepresence to observe or act in a remote location, or 
communicates in real time with other users using Internet chat, or just makes a 
plain old-fashioned telephone call. In short, once we begin dealing with verbs and 
nouns which start with &#x93;&ldquo;tele,&#x94;&rdquo; we no longer deal with the traditional cultural 
domain of representation. Instead, we enter a new conceptual space which this 
book has not explored so far &#x97;&mdash; telecommunication. How can we start navigating 
it? 

When we think of the decade of the 1890s, we think of the birth of 

cinema. In the preceding decades, and the one which immediately followed the 
1890s, most other modern media technologies were developed, enabling the 
recording of still images of visible reality (photography) and sound (the 
phonograph), as well as real-time transmission of images, sounds, and text 
(telegraph, television, the fax, telephone and radio). Yet, more than any of these 
other inventions, it was the introduction of cinema which impressed itself most 
strongly on public memory. The year which we remember and celebrate is 1895; 
it is not 1875 (first television experiments of Carey) or 1907 (the introduction of 
the fax). Clearly, we are more impressed (or at least, we have been until the 
Internet) with modern media's ability to record aspects of reality and then use 
these recordings to simulate it for our senses, than with its real-time 

 

&#xC; 
151

communication aspect. If we had a choice to be among the Lumiere's first 
audience or be the among the first users of the telephone, we would choose the 
former. Why? The reason is that the new recording technologies led to the 
development of new arts in the way that real-time communication did not. The 
fact that aspects of sensible reality can be recorded and that these recordings can 
be later combined, re-shaped and manipulated &#x97;&mdash; in short, edited &#x97;&mdash; made 
possible the new media-based arts which were soon to dominate the twentieth 
century: fiction films, radio concerts and music programs, television serials and 
news programs. Despite persistent experiments of the avant-garde artists with 
modern technologies of real-time communication &#x97;&mdash; radio in the 1920s, video in 
the 1970s, Internet in the 1990s &#x97;&mdash; the ability to communicate over a physical 
distance in real-time by itself did not seem to inspire fundamentally new aesthetic 
principles the way film or tape recording did. 

Since their beginning in the nineteenth century, modern media 

technologies have  developed along two distinct trajectories. The first is 
representational technologies: film, audio and video magnetic tape, varios digital 
storage formats. The second is real-time communication tecnologies, i.e. 
everything which begins with &#x93;&ldquo;tele&#x94;&rdquo;: telegraph, telephone, telex, television, 
telepresence. Such new twentieth century cultural forms as radio and later 
television emerge at the intersections of these two trajectories. In this meeting, the 
technologies of real-time communication became subordinated to technologies of 
representation. Telecommunication was used for distribution, as with 
broadcasting which enabled a twentith century radio listener or television viewer 
to receive a transmission in real time. But a typical program being broadcast, be it 
a film, a play or a musical performance,  was a traditional aesthetic object, i.e. a 
construction which utilizes elements of familiar reality and which was created by 
professionals before the transmission. For instance, although following the 
adoptation of video tape recorders television retained some live programs such as 
news and talk shows, the majority of programming came to be pre-recorded.  

The attempts of some artists from the 1960s onward to substitute a 
traditionally defined aesthetic object by other concepts such as &#x93;&ldquo;process,&#x94;&rdquo; 
&#x93;&ldquo;practice,&#x94;&rdquo; and &#x93;&ldquo;concept&#x94;&rdquo; only highlight the strong hold of the tradtional concept 
on our cultural imagination. The concept of an aesthetic object as an object, i.e. as 
a self-contained structure limited in space and/or time, is fundamental to all 
modern thinking about aesthetics. For instance, in his Languages of Art (1976), 
one of the most influential aesthetic theories of the last decades, philosopher 
Nelson Goodman names the following four symptoms of the aesthetic: syntactic 
density, semantic density, syntactic repleteness and the ability to exemplify.172 
These characteristics assume a finite object in space and/or time: a literary text, a 
musical or dance performance, a painting, a work of architecture. For another 
example of how modern aesthetic theory relies on the concept of a fixed object we 

 

&#xC; 
152

can look at the very influential article &#x93;&ldquo;From Work to Text&#x94;&rdquo; by Roland Barthes. In 
this article Barthes establisheds an oppositon between a traditional notion of a 
&#x93;&ldquo;work&#x94;&rdquo; and  a new notion of &#x93;&ldquo;text,&#x94;&rdquo; about which he advances seven 
&#x94;&rdquo;propositions.&#x94;&rdquo;173 As can be seen from these propositions, Barthes&#x92;&rsquo;s notion of a 
&#x93;&ldquo;text&#x94;&rdquo; is an attempt to go beyond traditional aesthetic object understood as 
something clearly delineated from other objects semantically and physically &#x97;&mdash; 
and yet ultimately Barthes retains the traditonal concept. Proposition (1) states: 
&#x93;&ldquo;The work can be held in hand, the text is held in language, only exists in the 
movement of discourse.&#x94;&rdquo;  &#x93;&ldquo;Text&#x94;&rdquo; is ruled by metonymy (3) (think of 
hyperlinking) ; it aims at dissemination of meanings and is fundamentally 
intertextual (4) (recall another Barthes&#x92;&rsquo;s quote already cited in &#x93;&ldquo;Selection&#x94;&rdquo; 
section); it does not have a single Author (5); it &#x93;&ldquo;requires that one try to abolish 
(or at the very least to diminish) the distance between writing and reading&#x94;&rdquo; (6), 
the distance which, as Barthes notes, is a recent historical invention. Like a post-
serial musical score which makes a performer into its co-author, &#x93;&ldquo;text&#x94;&rdquo; &#x93;&ldquo;asks of 
the reader a practical collaboration&#x94;&rdquo; (6). Given this last proposition in particular, 
many interactive new media objects qualify as &#x93;&ldquo;texts&#x94;&rdquo; in Barthes&#x92;&rsquo;s definition. Yet 
his notion of a &#x93;&ldquo;text&#x94;&rdquo; still assumes a reader &#x93;&ldquo;reading,&#x94;&rdquo; in most general sense, 
something which was previously &#x93;&ldquo;written.&#x94;&rdquo; In short, while a &#x93;&ldquo;text&#x94;&rdquo; is interactive, 
hypertextual, distributed, and dynamic (to translate Barthes&#x92;&rsquo;s propositions into 
new media terms), it is still a finite object. 

By foregrounding telecommunication, both real-time and asynchronous, as 

a fundamental cultural activity, Internet asks us to reconsider the very paradigm 
of what an aesthetic object is. Is it necessary for the concept of the aesthetics to 
assume representation? Does art necessary involves a finite object? Can 
telecommunication between users by itself be a subject of an aesthetic? Similarly, 
can the user&#x92;&rsquo;s search for information be understood aesthetically? In short, if a 
user accessing information and a user telecommunicating with other(s) are as 
common in computer culture as a user interacting with a representation, can we 
expand our aesthetic theories to include these two new situations? 

I find these to be hard questions; but as a way to begin approaching them, 

this section will offer an analysis of different kinds of &#x93;&ldquo;tele&#x94;&rdquo; operations which I 
summed up by my own term &#x93;&ldquo;teleaction.&#x94;&rdquo; 
 
 
Telepresence: Illusion versus Action 
 
In an opening sequence from a movie Titanic (James Cameron, 1997), we see an 
operator sitting at the controls. The operator is wearing a head-mounted display 
which shows an image transmitted from a remote location. This allows him to 
remotely control a small vehicle, and with its help, to explore the insides of the 

 

&#xC; 
153

&#x93;&ldquo;Titanic&#x94;&rdquo; lying on the bottom of the ocean. In short, the operator becomes 
"telepresent."  
 
With the rise of the Web, telepresence which until recently was restricted 
to few specialized industrial and military applications, became more of a familiar 
experience. The search on Yahoo! for "interesting devices connected to the Net" 
returns links to a variety of Net-based telepresence applications: coffee machines, 
robots, interactive model railroad, audio devices and, of course, the ever-popular 
web cams.174 Some of these devices, such as most web cams, do not allow for 
true telepresence &#x97;&mdash; you get images from a remote location but you can't act. 
Others, however, are true telepresence links, which allow the user to perform 
actions remotely. 
 
Remote video cameras and remotely navigated devices such as the one 
shown in Titanic exemplify the notion of being &#x93;&ldquo;present&#x94;&rdquo; in a physically remote 
location. At the same time, the experience of daily navigating the Web also 
involves telepresence on a more basic level. By following hyperlinks, the user 
&#x93;&ldquo;teleports&#x94;&rdquo; from one server to another, from one physical location to the next. So 
if we are still fetishising video-based telepresence as portrayed in &#x93;&ldquo;Titanic,&#x94;&rdquo; this is 
only because we are slow to accept the primacy of information space over 
physical space in computer culture. But in fact the ability to instantly &#x93;&ldquo;teleport&#x94;&rdquo; 
from one server to another, to be able to explore a multitude of documents located 
on computers around the world, all from one location, is much more important 
that being able to perform physical actions in one remote location. 

Following my strategy in &#x93;&ldquo;Compositing&#x94;&rdquo; section where I focused on 

digital compositing of moving images as an example of the general operation of 
compositing, this section will discuss telepresence in its accepted, more narrow 
meaning: the ability to see and act at a distance. And just as I constructed one 
possible archeology of digital compositing, here I would like to construct one 
possible historical trajectory leading to computer-based telepresence. If digital 
compositing can be placed along with other technologies for creating fake reality 
such as fashion and make up, realist paintings, dioramas, military decoys and VR, 
telepresence can be thought of as one example of representational technologies 
used to enable action, i.e. to allow the viewer to manipulate reality through 
representations. Other examples of these action-enabling technologies are maps, 
architectural drawings, and x-rays. All of them allow their user to act over 
distance. Given this, what are the new possibilities for action offered by 
telepresence in contrast to these older technologies? This question will guide my 
discussion of telepresence here. 

If we look at the word itself, the meaning of the term telepresence is 
presence over distance. But presence where? Interactive media designer and 
theorist Brenda Laurel defines telepresence as "a medium that allows you to take 
your body with you into some other environment... you get to take some subset of 

 

&#xC; 
154

Both popular media and the critics have downplayed the concept of 

And yet, from the point of view of the history of the technologies of 

your senses with you into another environment. And that environment may be a 
computer-generated environment, it may be a camera-originated environment, or 
it may be a combination of the two."175 In this definition, telepresence 
encompasses two different situations: being "present" in a synthetic computer-
generated environment (what is commonly referred as virtual reality ) and being 
"present" in a real remote physical location via a live video image. Scott Fisher, 
one of the developers of NASA Ames Virtual Environment Workstation &#x97;&mdash; the 
first modern VR system &#x97;&mdash; similarly does not distinguish between being "present" 
in a computer-generated or a real remote physical location. Describing Ames 
system, he writes:  "Virtual environments at the Ames system are synthesized 
with 3D computer-generated imagery, or are remotely sensed by user-controlled, 
stereoscopic video camera configurations."176 Fisher uses "virtual environments" 
as all-encompassing term, reserving "telepresence" for the second situation: 
"presence" in a remote physical location.177 I will follow his usage here. 
 
telepresence in favor of virtual reality. The photographs of the Ames system, for 
instance, have been often featured to illustrate the idea of an escape from any 
physical space into a computer-generated world. The fact that a head-mounted 
display can also show a televised image of a remote physical location was hardly 
ever mentioned.  
 
action, telepresence is a much more radical technology than virtual reality, or 
computer simulations in general. Let us consider the difference between the two.  
 
Like fake reality technologies which preceded it, virtual reality provides 
the subject with the illusion of being present in a simulated world. Virtual reality 
adds a new capability: it allows the subject to actively change this world. In other 
words, the subject is given control over a fake reality. For instance, an architect 
can modify an architectural model, a chemist can try different molecule 
configuration, a tank driver can shoot at a model of a tank, and so on. But, what is 
modified in each case is nothing but data stored in a computer's memory! The 
user of any computer simulation has power over the virtual world which only 
exists inside a computer.    
 
reality itself. Telepresence provides the ability to remotely manipulate physical 
reality in real time through its image. The body of a teleoperator is transmitted, in 
real time, to another location where it can act on subject's behalf: repairing a 
space station, doing underwater excavation or bombing a military base in 
Baghdad or Yugoslavia. 

Telepresence allows the subject to control not just the simulation but 

 

&#xC; 
155

 

  Does it originate with telepresence? Since we 

Catherine the Great  was fooled into mistaking painted facades for real 

 
Thus, the essence of telepresence is that it is anti-presence. I don't have to 
be physically present in a location to affect reality at this location. A better term 
would be teleaction. Acting over distance. In real time.   
 
villages (see &#x93;&ldquo;Compositing.&#x94;&rdquo;) Today, from thousands of miles away &#x97;&mdash; as it was 
demonstrated during the Gulf War &#x97;&mdash; we can send missile equipped with a 
television camera close enough to tell the difference between a target and a decoy. 
We can direct the flight of the missile using the image transmitted back by its 
camera, we can carefully fly towards the target. And, using the same image, we 
blow the target away. All that is needed is to position the computer cursor over 
the right place in image and to press a button.   
 
 
Image-Instruments  
 
How new is this use of images?178
are accustomed to consider the history of visual representations in the West in 
terms of illusion, it may seem that to use images to enable action is a completely 
new phenomenon. However, French philosopher and sociologist Bruno Latour 
proposes that certain kinds of images have always functioned as instruments of 
control and power, power being defined as the ability to mobilize and manipulate 
resources across space and time.  
One example of such image-instruments analyzed by Latour are 
 
perspectival images. Perspective establishes the precise and reciprocal 
relationship between objects and their signs. We can go from objects to signs 
(two-dimensional representations); but we can also go from such signs to three-
dimensional objects. This reciprocal relationship allows us not only to represent 
reality but also to control it.179 For instance, we cannot measure the sun in space 
directly, but we only need a small ruler to measure it on a photograph (the 
perspectival image par excellence).180 And even if we could fly around the sun, 
we would still be better off studying the sun through its representations which we 
can bring back from the trip &#x97;&mdash; because now we have unlimited time to measure, 
analyze, and catalog them. We can move objects from one place to another by 
simply moving their representations: "You can see a church in Rome, and carry it 
with you in London in such a way as to reconstruct it in London, or you can go 
back to Rome and amend the picture." Finally, we can also represent absent things 
and plan our movement through space by working on representations: "One 
cannot smell or hear or touch Sakhalin Island, but you can look at the map and 
determine at which bearing you will see the land when you send the next 
fleet."181  All in all, perspective is more than just a sign system, reflecting reality 

 

&#xC; 
156

In my view, there are two fundamental differences. Because telepresence 

Perspective is only one example of image-instruments. Any representation 

&#x97;&mdash; it  makes possible the manipulation of reality through the manipulation of its 
signs. 
 
which systematically captures some features of reality can be used as an 
instrument. In fact, most types of representations which do not fit into the history 
of illusionism (which includes both representation and simulation traditions as 
outlined in &#x93;&ldquo;Screen&#x94;&rdquo; section) &#x97;&mdash; diagrams and charts, maps and x-rays, infrared 
and radar images &#x97;&mdash; belong to the second history: that of representations as 
instruments for action. 
 
 
Telecommunication 
 
Given that images have always been used to affect reality, does telepresence bring 
anything new? A map, for instance, already allows for a kind of teleaction: it can 
be used to predict the future and therefore to change it. To quote Latour again, 
"one cannot smell or hear or touch Sakhalin Island, but you can look at the map 
and determine at which bearing you will see the land when you send the next 
fleet." 
 
involves electronic transmission of video images, the constructions of 
representations takes place instantaneously. Making a perspectival drawing or a 
chart, taking a photograph or shooting film takes time. Now I can use a remote 
video camera which capture images in real-time, sending these images back to me 
without any delay. This allows me to monitor any visible changes in a remote 
location (weather conditions, movements of troops, and so on), adjusting my 
actions accordingly. Depending upon what information I need, radar can be used 
instead of a video camera as well. In either case, an image-instrument displayed 
by a real-time screen (see &#x93;&ldquo;Screen&#x94;&rdquo; section) is formed in real time.  
 
visual information about a remote place in real time allows us to manipulate 
physical reality in this place, also in real-time. If power, according to Latour, 
includes the ability to manipulate resources at a distance, then teleaction provides 
a new and unique kind of power: real-time remote control.  I can drive a toy 
vehicle, repair a space station, do underwater excavation, operate on a patient or 
kill &#x97;&mdash; all from a distance.  
 
What technology is responsible for this new power? Since teleoperator 
typically acts with the help of a live video image (for instance, when remotely 
operating a moving vehicle such as in the opening sequence of "Titanic"), we may 
think at first that it is the technology of video, or, more precisely, of television. 
The original nineteenth century meaning of television was "vision over distance." 

The second difference is directly related to the first. The ability to receive 

 

 

&#xC; 
157

Now, consider the Telegarden project by Ken Goldberg and his 

If images are transmitted at regular intervals, if these intervals are short 

Only after 1920s, when television was equated with broadcasting, does this 
meaning fade away. However, during the preceding half a century (television 
research begins in the 1870s), television engineers were mostly concerned with 
the problem of how to transmit consecutive images of a remote location to enable 
"remote seeing." 
 
enough, and if the images have sufficient detail, the viewer will have enough 
reliable information about the remote location for teleaction. The early television 
systems used slow mechanical scanning and the resolution as low as thirty lines. 
In the case of modern television systems, the visible reality is being scanned at the 
resolution of a few hundred lines sixty times a second. This provides enough 
information for most telepresence tasks.  
 
associates.182 In this Web telerobotics project, the Web users operate a robotic 
arm to plant the seeds in a garden. Instead of continuosly refreshed video, the 
project uses uses user-driven still images. The image shows the garden from the 
viewpoint of the video camera attached to the robotic arm. When the arm is 
moved to a new location, a new still image is transmitted. These still images 
provide enough information for the particular teleaction in this project &#x97;&mdash; planting 
the seeds. 
 
generally, we can say that different kinds of teleaction require different temporal 
and spatial resolution. If the operator needs an immediate feedback on her actions 
(the example of remote operation of a vehicle is again appropriate here), frequent 
update of images is essential. But in the case of planting a garden using a remote 
robot arm, user-triggered still images are sufficient.  

As this example indicates, it is possible to teleact without video. More 

Now, consider another example of telepresence. Radar images are 

obtained by scanning the surrounding area once every few seconds.  The visible 
reality is reduced to a single point. A radar image does not contain any indications 
about shapes, textures or colors present in a video image &#x97;&mdash; it only records the 
position of an object. Yet this information is quite sufficient for the most basic 
teleaction: to destroy an object. 

In this extreme case of teleaction, the image is so minimal it hardly can be 

called an image at all. However, it is still sufficient for real-time remote action. 
What is crucial is that the information is transmitted in real time.  

If we put the examples of video-based and radar-based telepresence 
together, the common denominator turns out to be not video but electronic 
transmission of signals. In other words, the technology which makes teleaction in 
real time possible is electronic telecommunication. It itself was made possible by 
two discoveries of the nineteenth century: electricity and electromagnetism. 
Coupled with a computer used for real time control, electronic telecommunication 

 

&#xC; 
158

To address this question I will juxtapose the arguments by two key 

leads to a new and unprecedented relationship between objects and their signs. It 
makes instantaneous not only the process by which objects are turned into signs 
but also the reverse process &mdash; manipulation of objects through these signs.  
 
Umberto Eco once defined a sign as something which can be used to tell a 
lie. This definition correctly describes one function of visual representations &#x97;&mdash; to 
deceive. But in the age of electronic telecommunication we need a new definition: 
a sign is something which can be used to teleact. 
 
 
Distance and Aura  
 
Having analyzed the operation of telepresence in its more narrow and 
conventional meanings as a physical presence in a remote environment, I now 
want to come back to a more general sense of telepresence: real-time 
communication with a physically remote location. This meaning fits all &#x93;&ldquo;tele&#x94;&rdquo; 
technologies, from television, radio, fax and telephone to Internet hyperlinking 
and chat. Again, I want to ask the same question as before: what is different about 
more recent telecommunication technology as opposed to older onces?  
 
theoreticians of old and new media: Walter Benjamin and Paul Virilio. These 
arguments come from two essays written half a century apart: Benjamin&#x92;&rsquo;s 
celebrated  "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" (1936)183 
and Virilio&#x92;&rsquo;s "Big Optics" (1992).184 Benjamin&#x92;&rsquo;s and Virilio&#x92;&rsquo;s essays focus on 
the same theme: the disruption caused by a cultural artifact, specifically, new 
communication technology (film in the case of Benjamin, telecommunication in 
the case of Virilio) in the familiar patterns of human perception; in short, 
intervention of technology into human nature. But what is human nature and what 
is technology? How does one draw the boundary between the two in the twentieth 
century? Both Benjamin and Virilio solve this problem in the same way. They 
equate nature with spatial distance between the observer and the observed; and 
they see technologies as destroying this distance. As we will see, these two 
assumptions lead them to interpret the prominent new technologies of their times 
in a very similar way. 
 
Benjamin starts with his now famous concept of aura: the unique presence 
of a work of art, of a historical or of a natural object. We may think that an object 
has to be close by if we are to experience its aura but, paradoxically, Benjamin 
defines aura "as the unique phenomenon of a distance"(224). "If, while resting on 
a summer afternoon, you follow with your eyes a mountain range on the horizon 
or a branch which casts its shadow over you, you experience the aura of those 
mountains, of that branch" (225). Similarly, writes Benjamin, "painter maintains 
in his work a natural distance from reality" (235). This respect for distance 

 

&#xC; 
159

Writing about telecommunication and telepresence, Virilio also uses the 

common to both natural perception and painting is overturned by the new 
technologies of mass reproduction, particularly photography and film. The 
cameraman, whom Benjamin compares to a surgeon, "penetrates deeply into its 
[reality] web" (237); his camera zooms in order to "pray an object from its shell" 
(225). With its new mobility, glorified in such films as "A Man with the Movie 
Camera," the camera can be anywhere, and, with its superhuman vision, it can 
obtain a close-up of any object. These close-ups, writes Benjamin, satisfy the 
desires of the masses "to bring things 'closer' spatially and humanly," "to get hold 
of an object at very close range" (225). Along with disregarding the scale, the 
unique locations of the objects are discarded as well as their photographs brought 
together within a single picture magazine or a film newsreel, the forms which fit 
in with the demand of mass democratic society for "the universal equality of 
things."  
 
concept of distance to understand their effect. In Virilio's reading, these 
technologies collapse the physical distances, uprooting the familiar patterns of 
perception which grounded our culture and politics. Virilio introduces the terms 
Small Optics and Big Optics to underline the dramatic nature of this change. 
Small Optics are based on geometric perspective and shared by human vision, 
painting and film. It involves the distinctions between near and far, between an 
object and a horizon against which the object stands out. Big Optics is real-time 
electronic transmission of information, "the active optics of time passing at the 
speed of light."  
 
characteristic of Small Optics era are erased. If information from any point can be 
transmitted with the same speed, the concepts of near and far, horizon, distance 
and space itself no longer have any meaning. So, if for Benjamin the industrial 
age displaced every object from its original setting, for Virilio post-industrial age 
eliminates the dimension of space altogether. At least in principle, every point on 
Earth is now instantly accessible from any other point on Earth. As a 
consequence, Big Optics locks us in a claustrophobic world without any depth or 
horizon; the Earth becomes our prison.  
 
horizon,...resulting in an impending primacy of real time perspective of 
undulatory optics over real space of the linear geometrical optics of the 
Quattrocento."185 He mourns the destruction of distance, geographic grandeur, 
the vastness of natural space, the vastness which guaranteed time delay between 
events and our reactions, giving us time for critical reflection necessary to arrive 
at a correct decision. The regime of Big Optics inevitably leads to real time 
politics, the politics which requires instant reactions to the events transmitted with 

As Small Optics are being replaced by Big Optics, the distinctions 

Virilio asks us to notice "the progressive derealization of the terrestrial 

 

&#xC; 
160

Given the surprising similarity of Benjamin's and Virilio's accounts of new 

Virilio postulates a historical break between film and telecommunication, 

the speed of light, and which ultimately can only be efficiently handled by 
computers responding to each other. 
 
technologies, it is telling how differently they draw the boundaries between 
natural and cultural, between what is already assimilated within the human nature 
and what is still new and threatening. Writing in 1936, Benjamin uses the real 
landscape and a painting as examples of what is natural for human perception. 
This natural state is invaded by film which collapses distances, bringing 
everything equally close and destroys aura. Virilio, writing half a century later, 
draws lines quite differently. If for Benjamin film still represented an alien 
presence, for Virilio it already became part of our human nature, the continuation 
of our natural sight. Virilio considers human vision, the Renaissance perspective, 
painting and film as all belonging to Small Optics of geometric perspective in 
contrast to the Big Optics of instant electronic transmission.  
 
between Small Optics and Big Optics. It is also possible to read the movement 
from the first to the second in terms of continuity &#x97;&mdash;  if we are to use the concept 
of modernization. Modernization is accompanied by the process of disruption of 
physical space and matter, the process which privileges interchangeable and 
mobile signs over the original objects and relations. In the words of an art 
historian Jonathan Crary (who draws on Deleuze and Guattari's Anti-Oedipus and 
on Marx's Grandrisse),  "Modernization is the process by which capitalism 
uproots and makes mobile that which is grounded, clears away or obliterates that 
which impedes circulation, and makes exchangeable what is singular."186 The 
concept of modernization fits equally well Benjamin's account of film and 
Virilio's account of telecommunication, the latter just being a more advanced 
stage in this continual process of turning objects into mobile signs. Before, 
different physical locations met within a single magazine spread or a film 
newsreel; now, they meet within a single electronic screen. Of course, the signs 
now themselves exist as digital data which makes their transmission and 
manipulation even easier. Also, in contrast to photographs, which remain fixed 
once they are printed, computer representation makes every image inherently 
mutable &#x97;&mdash; creating signs which are no longer just mobile but also forever 
modifiable.187 Yet, significant as they are, these are ultimately quantitative rather 
than qualitative differences &#x97;&mdash; with one exception. 
 
As can be seen from my discussion above, in contrast to photography and 
film, electronic telecommunication can function as two-way communication. Not 
only can user immediately obtain images of various locations, bringing them 
together within a single electronic screen, but, via telepresence, she can also be 
"present" in these locations. In other words, she can affect change on material 
reality over physical distance in real time.  

 

&#xC; 
161

 
Film, telecommunication, telepresence. Benjamin's and Virilio's analyses 
make it possible for us to understand the historical effect of these technologies in 
terms of progressive diminishing and finally complete elimination of something 
which both writers see as a fundamental condition of human perception &#x97;&mdash; spatial 
distance, the distance between the subject who is seeing and the object being seen. 
This reading of distance involved in (perspectival) vision as something positive, 
as a necessary ingredient of human culture provides an important alternative for a 
much more dominant tendency in modern thought to read distance negatively. 
This negative reading is then used to attack the visual sense as a whole. Distance 
becomes responsible for creating the gap between the spectator and spectacle, for 
separating subject and object, for putting the first in the position of transcendental 
mastery and rendering the second inert. Distance allows the subject to  
treat the Other as object; in short, it makes objectification possible. Or, as a 
French fisherman have summarized these arguments to young Lacan who was 
looking at a sardine can floating on the surface of the sea, years before he became 
a famous psychoanalyst: "You see the can? Do you see it? Well, it doesn't see 
you!"188  
 
In Western thought, vision has always been understood and discussed in 
opposition to touch; so, inevitably, the denigration of vision (to use Martin Jay's 
term189) leads to the elevation of touch. Thus criticisim of vision predictably 
leads to the new theoretical interest in the idea of the haptic. We may be tempted, 
for instance, to read the lack of distance characteristic of the act of touching as 
allowing for a different relationship between subject and object. Benjamin and 
Virilio block this seemingly logical line of argument since they both stress the 
aggression potentially present in touchin. Rather than understanding touch as a 
respectful and careful contact or as a caress, they present it as unceremonious and 
aggressive disruption of matter.  
 
Benjamin and Virilio, distance guaranteed by vision preserves the aura of an 
object, its position in the world, while the desire "to brings things 'closer' " 
destroys objects' relations to each other, ultimately obliterating the material order 
altogether and rendering the notions of distance and space meaningless. So even if 
we are to disagree with their arguments about new technologies and to question 
their equitation of natural order and distance, the critique of vision &#x97;&mdash; touch 
opposition is something we should retain. Indeed, in contrast to older action 
enabling representational technologies, real-time image instruments literally 
allows us to touch us objects over distance, thus making possible their easy 
destruction as well. The potential aggresivity of looking turns out to be rather 
innocent than the actual aggression of electronically-enabled touch. 

Thus, the standard connotations of vision and touch become reversed. For 

 

&#xC; 
162

 

IV. The Illusions 

190

    

 

RealityEngine is a high-performance graphics computer which was 

In terms of the images it can generate RealityEngine may not be superior 

 
Zeuxis was a legendary Greek painter who lived in the fifth century BC. The story 
of his competition with Parrhasius exemplifies the concern with illusionism which 
was to occupy Western art throughout much of its history. According to the story, 
Zeuxis painted grapes with such a skill that the birds begun to fly down trying to 
eat from the painted vine.
 
manufactured by Silicon Graphics Inc. in the last decade of the twentieth century 
AC. Optimized to generate real time interactive photorealistic 3D graphics, it is 
used to create computer games and special effects for feature films and TV, to run 
scientific visualization models and computer-aided design software. Last but not 
least, RealityEngine is routinely employed to run high-end VR environments &mdash; 
this latest achievement in West's struggle to outdo Zeuxis.  
 
to Zeuxis. Yet it can do other tricks, unavailable to the Greek painter. For 
instance, it allows the viewer to move around virtual grapes, touch them, lift them 
on a palm of a hand. And this ability of a viewer to interact with a representation 
may be as important in contributing to the overall reality effect as the images 
themselves. Which makes RealityEngine a formidable contender to Zeuxis. 
 
In the twentieth century art has largely rejected the goal of illusionism, the 
goal which was so important to it before, and, as a consequence, it lost much of its 
popular support. The production of illusionistic representations became the 
domain of mass culture and of media technologies &mdash; photography, film and 
video. The creation of illusions was delegated to optical and electronic machines.  
 
Today, everywhere, these machines are being replaced by new, digital 
illusion generators &mdash; computers. The production of all illusionistic images is 
191
becoming the sole province of PCs and Macs, Onyxes and RealityEngines.
 
the new media industries expanding. As a consequence, these industries are 
obsessed with visual illusionism. This obsession is particularly strong in the field 
of computer imaging and animation. Its annual SIGGRAPH conventions is the 
competition between Zeuxis and Parrhasius on the industrial scale: about 40,000 
people gather on a trade floor around thousands of new hardware and software 
displays, all competing with each other to deliver the best illusionistic images. 
The industry frames each new technological advance in image acquisition and 
display in terms of the ability of computer technologies to catch up and surpass 
the visual fidelity of analog media technologies. On their side, animators and 
software engineers are perfecting the techniques for synthesizing photorealistic 
images of sets and human actors. The quest for a perfect simulation of reality 

This massive replacement is one of the key economic factors which keeps 

  

 

&#xC; 
163

Continuing our bottom-up trajectory in examining new media, we have 

drives the whole field of Virtual Reality (VR). In a different sense, the designers 
of human-computer interfaces are also concerned with illusion. Many of them 
believe that their main goal is to make the computer invisible, i.e. to construct an 
interface which is completely &ldquo;natural.&rdquo; (In reality, what they usually mean by 
&ldquo;natural&rdquo; is simply older, already assimilated technologies, such as office 
stationary and furniture, a car, VCR controls, or a telephone.) 
 
now arrived at the level of appearance. Although industry&rsquo;s obsession with 
illusionism is not the sole factor responsible for making new media look they way 
they do, it definitely one of the key. Focusing on the issue of illusionism, the 
sections of this chapter address different questions raised by it. How is the &ldquo;reality 
effect&rdquo; of a synthetic image different from that of  the optical media? Is computer 
technology redefines our standards of illusionism as determined by our earlier 
experience with photography, film and video? &ldquo;Synthetic Realism as Bricolage&rdquo; 
and &ldquo;Synthetic Image and its Subject&rdquo;  provide two possible answers to these 
questions. These sections investigate the new &ldquo;internal&rdquo; logic of a computer-
generated illusionistic image by comparing lens-based and computer imaging 
technologies. The third section, &ldquo;Illusion, Narrative, and Interactivity,&rdquo; asks how 
visual illusionism and interactivity work together (as well as against each other), 
in virtual worlds, computer games, military simulators and other new interactive 
new media objects and interfaces.    

The discussions in these sections do not by any means exhaust the topic of 

illusionism in new media. &ldquo;Compositing&rdquo; and &ldquo;Digital Cinema&rdquo; sections in the 
preceding and last chapter, respectively, deal with this topic from other 
perspectives. As an example of other interesting questions which the topic of 
illusionism in new media may generate, I will list three below. 
 
1.A parallel can be established  between the gradual turn of computer imaging 
towards representational and photorealistic (the industry term for synthetic images 
which look as through they were created using traditional photography or 
cinematography) images throughout the end of the 1970s &mdash; beginning of the 
1980s and the similar turn towards representational painting and photography in 
 In the art world we witness photorealism, 
the art world during the same period.
neo-expressionism, &ldquo;post-modern&rdquo; &ldquo;simulation&rdquo; photography. In computer world, 
during the same period, we may note the rapid development of the key algorithms 
for photorealistic 3D image synthesis such as Phong shading, texture mapping, 
bump mapping, reflection mapping and cast shadows; also the development of 
first paint programs in mid 1970s which allowed manual creation of 
representational images and eventually, towards the end of the 1980s, software 
such as Photoshop which, for a while, made a manipulated photograph the most 
common type of imagery created on a computer.  In contrast, from the 1960s until 
late 1970s computer imaging was mostly abstract because it was algorithm-driven 

192

 

&#xC; 
164

193

 Similarly, art world 

and the technologies for inputting photographs into a computer were not easily 
accessible.
was either dominated by non-representational movements, such as conceptual art, 
minimalism and performance, or at least was approaching representation with a 
strong sense of irony and distance, in the case of pop art. (Although it is possible 
to argue that 1980s &ldquo;simulation&rdquo; artists also used &ldquo;appropriated&rdquo; images 
ironically, in their case the distance between the  media and artists&rsquo; images 
became visually very small or non-existent.) 
 
2.In the twentieth century, a very particular looking image created by still 
photography and cinematography came to dominate modern visual culture. Some 
of its qualities are linear perspective, depth of field effect (so only a part of 3D 
space is in focus), particular tonal and color range, and motion blur (rapidly 
moving objects appear smudged). As I will discuss in the following two sections, 
considerable research had to be accomplished before it became possible to 
simulate all these visual artifacts with computers. And even armed with special 
software, the designer still has to spend significant time manually recreating the 
look of photography or film. In other words, computer software does not produce 
such images by default. The paradox of digital visual culture is while all imaging 
is shifting towards being computer-based, the dominance of photographic and 
cinematic looking images is becoming even stronger. But rather than being a 
direct, &ldquo;natural&rdquo; result of photo and film technology, these images are constructed 
on computers. 3D virtual worlds are subjected to depth of field and motion blur 
algorithms; digital video is run through the special filters which simulate film 
grain; and so on. 

While visually, these computer-generated or filtered images are 
indistinguishable from traditional photo and film images, on the level of 
&ldquo;material,&rdquo; they are quite different as they are made from pixels or represented by 
mathematical equations and algorithms. In terms of  the kinds of operations which 
can be performed on them, they are also quite different from images of 
photography and film. These operations, such as &ldquo;copy and paste,&rdquo; &ldquo;add,&rdquo; 
&ldquo;multiply,&rdquo; &ldquo;compress,&rdquo; &ldquo;filter,&rdquo; reflect first of all the logic of  computer 
algorithms and of human-computer interface; only secondly they refer to the 
dimensions inherently meaningful to human perception. (In fact, we can think of 
these operations as well as HCI in general as balancing between the two poles of 
computer logic and human logic,  by which I mean the everyday ways of 
perception, cognition, causality and motivation &mdash; in short, human everyday 
existence.) 

Other aspects of the new logic of computer images can be derived from 

the general principles of new media (see &ldquo;Principles of New Media): many 
operations involved in their synthesis and editing are automated; they typically 
exist in many versions; they include hyperlinks; they act as interactive interfaces 

 

&#xC; 
165

(thus an image is something we expect to enter rather than to stay on its surface); 
and so on. To summarize, the visual culture of a computer age is cinematographic 
in its appearance, digital on the level of its material, and computational (i.e., 
software driven) in its logic. What are the interactions between these three levels? 
Can we expect that cinematographic images (I use this phrase here to include 
images of both traditional analog and computer-simulated cinematography and 
photography) will be at some point replaced by some very differently images 
whose appearance will be more in tune with their underlying computer-based 
logic? 

My own feeling is that the answer to this question is no. Cinematographic 

images are very efficient for cultural communication. Since they share many 
qualities with natural perception, they are easily processed by the brain. Their 
similarity to &ldquo;the real thing&rdquo; allows the designers to provoke emotions in viewers, 
as well as effectively visualize non-existent objects and scenes. And since 
computer representation turns these images into numerically coded data which is 
discrete (pixels) and modular (layers), they become subject to all economically 
beneficial effects of computerization: algorithmic manipulation, automation, 
variability and so on. A digitally-coded cinematographic image thus has two 
identities, so to speak: one satisfies the demands of human communication, 
another makes it suitable for computer-based practices of production and 
distribution.  
 
3. The available theories and histories of illusion in art and media, from 
Gombrich&rsquo;s Art and Illusion and Andre Bazin&rsquo;s &ldquo;The Myth of Total Cinema&rdquo;  to 
Stephen Bann&rsquo;s The True Vine, only deal with the visual dimensions.
 In my 
view, most of these theories have three arguments in common. These arguments 
concern three different relationships, respectively: between an image and physical 
reality (1); between an image and natural perception (2); between present and past 
images (3): 
 
1.  Illusionistic images share some features with the represented physical reality 

194

(for instance, the number of an object&rsquo;s angles).   

2.  Illusionistic images share some features with human vision (for instance, 

linear perspective).  

3.  Each period offers some new &ldquo;features&rdquo; which are perceived by audiences as 

&ldquo;improvement&rdquo; over of the previous period  (for instance, the evolution of 
cinema from silent to sound to color).

195

 

 
Until the arrival of computer media these theories were sufficient since the human 
desire to simulate reality indeed focused on its visual appearance (although not 
exclusively &mdash; think, for instance, of the tradition of automata). Today, while still 
useful, the traditional analysis of visual illusionism needs to be supplemented by 

 

&#xC; 
166

new theories. The reason is that the reality effect in many areas of new media 
such only partially depends on image&rsquo;s appearance. Such areas of new media as 
computer games, motion simulators, virtual worlds and VR, in particular, 
exemplify how computer-based illusionism functions differently. Rather than 
utilizing the single dimension of visual fidelity, they construct the reality effect on 
a number of dimensions, of which visual fidelity is just one. These new 
dimensions include active bodily engagement with a virtual world (for instance, 
the user of VR moves the whole body); the involvement of other senses beside 
vision (spatialized audio in virtual worlds and games; use of touch in VR; 
joysticks with force feedback; special vibrating and moving chairs for computer 
games play and motion rides), and the accuracy of the simulation of physical 
objects, natural pnenomena, anthropomorhic characters and humans.   

This last dimension, in particular, calls for an extensive analysis, because 
of the variety of methods and subjects of simulation. If the history of illusionism 
in art and media largely revolves around the simulation of how things look, for 
computer simulation this is one goal among many. Besides their visual 
appearance, simulation in new media aims to realistically model how objects and 
humans act, react, move, grow, evolve, think and feel. Physically-based modeling 
is used to simulate the behavior of inanimate objects and their interactions such as 
a ball bouncing of the floor or a glass being shattered. Computer games 
extensively use physical modeling to simulate collisions between objects and 
vehicle behavior &mdash; for instance, a car being bounced against the walls of the 
racing tracks, or behavior of a plane in a flight simulation. Other methods such as 
AL, formal grammars, fractal geometry and various applications of the 
complexity theory (popularly referred to as &ldquo;chaos theory&rdquo;) are used to simulate 
natural phenomena such as such as waterfalls and ocean waves, and animal 
behavior (flocking birds, school of fish). Yet another important area of simulation 
which also relies on many different methods is virtual characters and avatars, 
extensively used in movies, games, virtual worlds and human-computer 
interfaces. The examples are enemies and monsters in Quake; army units in 
WarCraft and similar games; human-like creatures in Creatures and other AL 
games and toys; and anthropomorphic interfaces such as Microsoft Office 
Assistant in Windows 98 &mdash; an animated character which periodically pops out in 
a small window offering help and tips. The goal of human simulation in itself can 
be further broken into a set of various sub-goals: simulation of human 
psychological states, human behavior, motivations, and emotions. (Thus, 
ultimately, the fully &ldquo;realistic&rdquo; simulation of a human being requires not only 
completely fulfilling the vision of the original AI paradigm but also going beyond 
it  &mdash; since original AI was solely aimed at simulating human perception and 
thinking processes but not emotions and motivations.) Yet another kind of 
simulation involve modeling the dynamic behavior over time of whole systems 
composed from organic and/or non-organic elements (for instance, popular series 

 

&#xC; 
167

of Sim games such as SimCity or SimAnts which simulate a city and an ant 
colony, respectively) 

And even on the visual dimension &mdash; the one dimension which new media 
&ldquo;reality engines&rdquo; share with the traditional illusionistic techniques &mdash; things work 
very differently. New media changes our concept of what an image is &mdash; because 
it turns a viewer into an active user. As a result, a illusionistic image is no longer 
something a subject simply looks at, comparing it with her memories of 
represented reality in order to judge the reality effect of this image. The new 
media image is something the user actively goes into, zooming in or clicking on 
individual parts with the assumption that they contain hyperlinks (for instance, 
imagemaps in Web sites). Moreover, new media turns most images into image-
interfaces and image-instruments (on the concept of image as interface, see 
&ldquo;Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; section; on image-instrument, see &ldquo;Teleaction&rdquo; section.) 
Image becomes interactive, i.e. it now functions as an interface between a user 
and a computer or other devices. The user emplys Image-interface to control a 
computer, asking it to zoom into the image or display another one, start a software 
application, connect to the Internet, and so on. The user employs image-
instruments to directly affect reality:,  move a robotic arm in a remote location, 
fire a missile, change the speed of the car and set the temperature, and so on. To 
evoke the term often used in film theory, new media moves us from identification 
to action. What kinds of actions can be performed via an image, how easily they 
can be accomplished, their range &mdash; all this plays part in user&rsquo;s assessment of the 
reality effect of the image.    

 

 

&#xC; 
168

 
 

Synthetic Realism and its Discontents 

In order to better understand the nature of "realism" of the synthetic 

Despite this difference, the ability to generate three-dimensional stills does 

 
"Realism" is the concept which inevitably accompanies the development and 
assimilation of 3D computer graphics. In media, trade publications and research 
papers, the history of technological innovation and research is presented as a 
progression toward realism &mdash; the ability to simulate any object in such a way that 
its computer image is indistinguishable from a photograph. At the same time, it is 
constantly pointed out that this realism is qualitatively different from the realism 
of optically based image technologies (photography, film), for the simulated 
reality is not indexically related to the existing world.  
 
not represent a radical break in the history of visual representation of the 
multitude comparable to the achievements of Giotto. A Renaissance painting and 
a computer image employ the same technique (a set of consistent depth cues) to 
create an illusion of space &mdash; existent or imaginary. The real break is the 
introduction of a moving synthetic image &mdash; interactive 3D computer graphics 
and computer animation. With these technologies, a viewer has an experience of 
moving around the simulated 3D space &mdash; something one can't do with an 
illusionistic painting. 
 
moving image it is relevant to consider a contiguous practice of the moving image 
&mdash; the cinema. I will approach the problem of "realism" in 3D computer 
animation starting from the arguments advanced in film theory in regard to 
cinematic realism.  
 
This section considers finished 3D computer animations which are created 
beforehand and then incorporated in a film, a television program, a Web site or a 
computer game. In the case of animations which are being generated by a 
computer in real-time, and thus are dependent not only on available software but 
also on hardware capabilities, somewhat different logic applies. The example of a 
new media object from the 1990s which uses both types of animation is a typical 
computer game. The interactive parts of the game are animated in real time. 
Periodically, the game switches to a &ldquo;full motion video&rdquo; mode. &ldquo;Full motion 
video&rdquo; is either a digital video sequence or a 3D animation which was pre-
rendered and therefore has higher level of detail &mdash; and thus &ldquo;realism&rdquo; &mdash; than the 
animations done in real time. The last section of this chapter, &ldquo;Image, Narrative 
and Illusion&rdquo; considers how such temporal shifts which are not limited to games 
but are typical of interactive new media objects in general, affects their &ldquo;realism.&rdquo; 
 
 
Technology and Style in Cinema 

 

&#xC; 
169

197

196

 In "The Myth of Total Cinema" Bazin claims that 

 
The idea of cinematic realism is first of all associated with Andr&eacute; Bazin, for 
whom cinematic technology and style move toward a "total and complete 
representation of reality."
the idea of cinema existed long before the medium had actually appeared and that 
the development of cinema technology "little by little made a reality out of 
original 'myth'."
 In this account, the modern technology of cinema is a 
realization of an ancient myth of mimesis, just as the development of aviation is a 
realization of the myth of Icarus. In another influential essay, "The Evolution of 
the Language of Cinema," Bazin reads the history of film style in similar 
teleological terms: the introduction of depth of field style in the end of 1930s and 
the subsequent innovations of Italian neorealists in 1940s gradually bring a 
spectator "into a relation with the image closer to that which he enjoys with 
reality." The essays differ not only in that the first interprets film technology 
while the second concentrates on film style, but also in their distinct approaches to 
the problem of realism. In the first essay realism stands for the approximation of 
phenomenological qualities of reality, "the reconstruction of a perfect illusion of 
the outside world in sound, color and relief."
emphasizes that a realistic representation should also approximate the perceptual 
and cognitive dynamics of natural vision. For Bazin, this dynamics involves 
active exploration of visual reality. Consequently, he interprets the introduction of 
depth of field as a step toward realism, because now the viewer can freely explore 
the space of film image.

 In the second essay Bazin 

199

  

198

200

Against Bazin's "idealist" and evolutionary account, Jean-Louis Comolli 
proposes a "materialist" and fundamentally non-linear reading of the history of 
cinematic technology and style. The cinema, Comolli tells us, "is born 
immediately as a social machine...from the anticipation and confirmation of its 
social profitability; economic, ideological and symbolic."
proposes to read history of cinema techniques as an intersection of technical, 
aesthetic, social and ideological determinations; however, his analyses clearly 
privilege an ideological function of the cinema. For Comolli, this function is 
"'objective' duplication of the 'real' itself conceived as specular reflection" (133). 
Along with other representational cultural practices, cinema works to endlessly 
reduplicate the visible thus sustaining the illusion that it is the phenomenal forms 
(such as the commodity form) which constitute the social "real" &mdash; rather than 
"invisible" to the eye relations of productions. To fulfill its function, cinema must 
maintain and constantly update its "realism." Comolli sketches this process using 
two alternative figures &mdash; addition and substitution.  

 Comolli thus 

In terms of technological developments, the history of realism in the 

cinema is one of additions. First, additions are necessary to maintain the process 
of disavowal, which for Comolli defines the nature of cinematic spectatorship 

 

&#xC; 
170

(132). Each new technological development (sound, panchromatic stock, color) 
points to the viewers just how "un-realistic" the previous image was and also 
reminds them that the present image, even though more realistic, will be 
superseded in the future &mdash; thus constantly sustaining the state of disavowal. 
Secondly, since cinema functions in a structure with other visual media, it has to 
keep up with their changing level of realism. For instance, by 1920s the spread of 
photography with its finely gradated image made cinematic image seem harsh by 
comparison, and film industry was forced to change to the panchromatic stock to 
keep up with the standard of photographic realism (131). This example is a good 
illustration of Comolli's reliance on Althusserian structuralist Marxism. 
Unprofitable economically for the film industry, this change is "profitable" in 
more abstract terms for the social structure as a whole, helping to sustain the 
ideology of the real/visible. 

In terms of cinematic style, the history of realism in cinema is one of the 

substitutions of cinematic techniques. For instance, while the change to 
panchromatic stock adds to the image quality, it leads to other losses. If earlier 
cinematic realism was maintained through the effects of depth, now 
"depth(perspective) loses its importance in the production of 'reality effects' in 
favor of shade, range, color" (131). So theorized, realistic effect in the cinema 
appears as a constant sum in an equation with a few variables which change 
historically and have equal weight: if more shading or color is "put in," 
perspective can be "taken out." Comolli follows the same logic of 
substitution/substraction in sketching the development of cinematic style in its 
first two decades: the early cinematographic image announces its realism through 
an abundance of moving figures and the use of deep focus; later these devices 
fade away and others, such as fictional logic, psychological characters, coherent 
space-time of narration, take over (130).  

While for Bazin realism functions as an Idea (in a Hegelian sense), for 

Comolli it plays an ideological role (in a Marxist sense); for David Bordwell and 
Janet Staiger, realism in film is first of all connected with the industrial 
organization of cinema. Put differently, Bazin draws the idea of realism from 
mythological utopian thinking. For him, realism is found in the space between 
reality and a transcendental spectator. Comolli sees it as an effect, produced 
between the image and the historical viewer and continuously sustained through 
the ideologically determined additions and substitutions of cinematic technologies 
and techniques. Bordwell and Staiger locate realism within the institutional 
discourses of film industries, implying that it is a rational and pragmatic tool in 
industrial competition.
 Emphasizing that cinema is an industry like any other, 
Bordwell and Staiger attribute the changes in cinematic technology to the factors 
shared by all modern industries &mdash; efficiency, product differentiation, 
maintenance of a standard of quality (247). One of the advantages of adopting an 
industrial model is that it allows the authors to look at specific agents &mdash; 

201

 

&#xC; 
171

manufacturing and supplying firms and professional associations (250). The latter 
are particularly important since it is in their discourses (conferences, trade 
meetings and publications) that the standards and goals of stylistic and technical 
innovations are articulated.  

Bordwell and Staiger agree with Comolli that the development of 

cinematic technology is not linear, however, they claim that it is not random 
either, as the professional discourses articulate goals of the research and set the 
limits for permissible innovations (260). According to Bordwell and Staiger, 
realism is one of these goals. They believe that such definition of a realism is 
specific to Hollywood:  
 

&ldquo;Showmanship,&rdquo; realism, invisibility: such cannons guided the SMPE 
[Society of Motion Picture Engineers] members toward understanding the 
acceptable and unacceptable choices in technical innovations, and these 
too became teleological. In another industry, the engineer's goal might be 
an unbreakable glass or a lighter alloy. In the film industry, the goals were 
not only increased efficiency, economy, and flexibility but also spectacle, 
concealment of artifice, and what Goldsmith [1934 president of SMPE] 
called &ldquo;the production of an acceptance semblance of reality.&rdquo; (258) 

 
     Bordwell and Staiger are satisfied with Goldsmith's definition of realism as 
"the production of an acceptance semblance of reality." However, such general 
and transhistorical definition does not seem to have any specificity for Hollywood 
and thus can't really account for the direction of technological innovation. 
Moreover, although they claim to have successfully reduced realism to a rational 
and a functional notion, in fact they have not managed to eliminate Bazin's 
idealism. It reappears in the comparison between the goals of innovation in film 
and other industries. "Lighter alloy" is used in aviation industry which can be 
thought of as the realization of the myth of Icarus; and is there not something 
mythical and fairy tale-like about "unbreakable glass"? 
 
 
Technology and Style in Computer Animation 
 
How can these three influential accounts of cinematic realism be used to approach 
the problem of realism in 3D computer animation? Bazin, Comolli, and Bordwell 
and Staiger offer us three different strategies, three different starting points. Bazin 
builds his argument by comparing the changing quality of the cinematic image 
with the phenomenological impression of visual reality. Comolli's analysis 
suggests a different strategy: to think of the history of computer graphics 
technologies and the changing stylistic conventions as a chain of substitutions 
functioning to sustain the reality effect for audiences. Finally, to follow Bordwell 

 

&#xC; 
172

and Staiger's approach is to analyze the relationship between the character of 
realism in computer animation and the particular industrial organization of the 
computer graphics industry. (For instance, we can ask how this character is 
affected by the cost difference between hardware and software development.) 
Further, we should pay attention to professional organizations in the field and 
their discourses which articulate the goals of research and where we may expect 
to find "admonitions about the range and nature of permissible innovations" 
(Bordwell and Staiger, 260). I will try the three strategies in turn. 

If we follow Bazin's approach and compare images drawn from the history 

of 3D computer graphics with the visual perception of natural reality, his 
evolutionary narrative appears to be confirmed. During the 1970s and the 1980s, 
computer images progressed towards fuller and fuller illusion of reality: from 
wireframe displays to smooth shadows, detailed textures, aerial perspective; from 
geometric shapes to moving animal and human figures; from Cimabue to Giotto 
to Leonardo and beyond. Bazin's idea that deep focus cinematography allowed the 
spectator a more active position in relation to film image, thus bringing cinematic 
perception closer to real life perception, also finds a recent equivalent in 
interactive computer graphics, where the user can freely explore the virtual space 
of the display from different points of view. And with such extensions of 
computer graphics technology as virtual reality, the promise of Bazin's "total 
realism" appears to be closer than ever, literally within arms reach of VR's user. 

The history of the style and technology of computer animation can also be 
seen in a different way. Comolli reads the history of realistic media as a constant 
trade-off of codes, a chain of substitutions producing the reality effect for 
audiences, rather than as an asymptotic movement toward the axes labeled 
"reality." His interpretation of the history of film style is first of all supported by 
the shift he observes between the cinematic style of the 1900s and the 1920s, the 
example I have already mentioned. Early film announces its realism by excessive 
representations of deep space achieved through every possible means: deep focus, 
moving figures, frame compositions which emphasize the effect of linear 
perspective. In the 1920s, with the adaptation of panchromatic film stock, "depth 
(perspective) loses its importance in the production of 'reality effects' in favor of 
shade, range, color" (Comolli, 131). A similar trade-off of codes can be observed 
during the short history of commercial 3D computer animation which begins 
around 1980. Initially, the animations were schematic, cartoon-like because the 
objects could only be rendered in wireframe or facet shaded form. Illusionism was 
limited to the indication of objects's volumes. To compensate for this limited 
illusionism in the representation of objects, computer animations of the early 
1980s ubiquitously showed deep space. This was done by emphasizing linear 
perspective (mostly, through the excessive use of grids) and by building 
animations around rapid movement in depth in the direction perpendicular to the 
screen. These strategies are exemplified by computer sequences of Disney movie 
Tron released in 1982. Toward the end of the 1980s, with commercial availability 

 

&#xC; 
173

of such techniques as smooth shading, texture mapping and cast shadows, the 
representation of objects in animations approached much closer the ideal of 
photorealism. At this time, the codes by which early animation signaled deep 
space started to disappear. In place of rapid in-depth movements and grids, 
animations begun to feature lateral movements in shallow space.  

The observed substitution of realistic codes in the history of 3D computer 

animation seems to confirm Comolli's argument. The introduction of new 
illusionistic techniques dislodges old ones. Comolli explains this process of 
sustaining reality effect from the point of view of audiences. Following Bordwell 
and Staiger's approach, we can consider the same phenomenon from the 
producers' point of view. For the production companies, the constant substitution 
of codes is necessary to stay competitive. As in every industry, the producers of 
computer animation stay competitive by differentiating their products. To attract 
clients, a company has to be able to offer some novel effects and techniques. But 
why do the old techniques disappear? The specificity of industrial organization of 
the computer animation field is that it is driven by software innovation. (In this, 
the field is closer to the computer industry as a whole, rather than film industry or 
graphic design.) New algorithms to produce new effects are constantly developed. 
To stay competitive, a company has to quickly incorporate the new software into 
their offerings. The animations are designed to show off the latest algorithm. 
Correspondingly, the effects possible with older algorithms are featured less often 
&mdash; available to everybody else in the field, they no longer signal "state of the art." 
Thus, the trade-off of codes in the history of computer animation can be related to 
the competitive pressure to quickly utilize the latest achievements of software 
research.  

While commercial companies employ programmers capable of adopting 

published algorithms for the production environment, the theoretical work of 
developing these algorithms mainly takes place in academic computer science 
departments and in research groups of top computer companies such as Microsoft 
or SGI (formerly Silicon Graphics). To further pursue the question of realism we 
need to ask about the direction of this work. Do computer graphics researches 
share a common goal?  

In analyzing the same question for film industry, Bordwell and Staiger 
claim that realism "was rationally adopted as an engineering aim" (258). They 
attempt to discover the specificity of Hollywood's conception of realism in the 
discourses of the professional organizations such as SMPE. For the computer 
graphics industry, the major professional organization is SIGGRAPH (Special 
Interest Group on Computer Graphics of the Association for Computing 
Machinery). Its annual conventions, attended by tenths of thousands, combine a 
trade show, a festival of computer animation and a scientific conference where the 
best new research work is presented. The conferences also serve as the meeting 
place for the researchers, engineers and commercial designers. If the research has 

 

&#xC; 
174

a common direction, we can expect to find its articulations in SIGGRAPH 
proceedings.  
 
Indeed, a typical research paper includes a reference to realism as the goal 
of investigations in computer graphics field. For example, a 1987 paper presented 
by three highly recognized scientists offers this definition of realism:  
  

Reys is an image rendering system developed at Lucasfilm Ltd. and 
currently in use at Pixar. In designing Reys, our goal was an architecture 
optimized for fast high-quality rendering of complex animated scenes. By 
fast we mean being able to compute a feature-length film in about a year; 
high quality means virtually indistinguishable from live action motion 
picture photography; and complex means as visually rich as real 
scenes.

202

  

The second goal, the simulation of "real scenes," turned out to be more 

 
In this definition, achieving synthetic realism means attaining two goals: the 
simulation of codes of traditional cinematography and the simulation of the 
perceptual properties of real life objects and environments. The first goal, the 
simulation of cinematographic codes, was in principle solved early on as these 
codes are well-defined and few in number. Every current professional computer 
animation system incorporates a virtual camera with variable length lens, depth of 
field effect, motion blur and controllable lights which simulate the lights available 
to a traditional cinematographer. 
 
complex. Creating computer time-based representation of an object involves 
solving three separate problems: the representation of an object's shape, the 
effects of light on its surface, and the pattern of movement. To have a general 
solution for each problem requires the exact simulation of underlying physical 
properties and processes. This is impossible because of the extreme mathematical 
complexity. For instance, to fully simulate the shape of a tree would involve 
mathematically "growing" every leaf, every brunch, every piece of bark; and to 
fully simulate the color of a tree's surface a programmer has to consider every 
other object in the scene, from grass to clouds to other trees. In practice, computer 
graphics researchers have resorted to solving particular local cases, developing a 
number of unrelated techniques for simulation of some kinds of shapes, materials, 
lighting effects and movements.  
 
The result is a realism which is highly uneven. Of course, one may suggest 
that this is not an entirely new development and that it can already be observed in 
the history of twentieth century optical and electronic representational 
technologies, which allows for more precise rendering of certain features of visual 
reality at the expense of others. For instance, both color film and color television 
were designed to assure acceptable rendering of human flesh tones at the expense 

 

&#xC; 
175

of other colors. However, the limitations of synthetic realism are qualitatively 
different.   
 
In the case of optically-based representation, the camera records already 
existing reality. Everything which exists can be photographed. Camera artifacts, 
such as depth of field, film grain, and the limited tonal range, affects the image as 
a whole.  

In the case of 3D computer graphics the situation is quite different. Now 

One of the original motivations behind the development of photorealistic 

What determines which particular problems received priority in research? 

reality itself has to be constructed from scratch before it can be photographed by a 
virtual camera. Therefore, the photorealistic simulation of "real scenes" is 
practically impossible as techniques available to commercial animators only cover 
the particular phenomena of visual reality. The animator using a particular 
software package can, for instance, easily create a shape of human face, but not 
the hair; the materials such as plastic or metal but not cloth or leather; the flight of 
a bird but not the jumps of a frog. The realism of computer animation is highly 
uneven, reflecting the range of problems which were addressed and solved.  
 
To a large extent, this was determined by the needs of the early sponsors of this 
research &mdash; the Pentagon and Hollywood. I am not concerned here to fully trace 
the history of these sponsorships. What is important for my argument is that the 
requirements of military and entertainment applications led the researchers to 
concentrate on simulation of the particular phenomena of visual reality, such as 
landscapes and moving figures. 
  
computer graphics was its application for flight simulators and other training 
technology.
research went into the techniques to render clouds, rugged terrain, trees, aerial 
perspective. Thus, the work which led to the development of the famous 
technique to represent natural shapes, such as mountains, using fractal 
mathematics was done at Boeing.
natural scenes and clouds were developed by the Grumman Aerospace 
Corporation.
applied to pattern recognition research in target tracking by a missile.
 
promise of lowering the costs of film and television production. In 1979 
Lucasfilm, Ltd., George Lucas's company, organized a computer animation 
research division. It hired the best computer scientists in the field to produce 
animations for special effects. The research for the effects in such films as Star 
Trek II: The Wrath of Khan (Nicholas Meyer, Paramount Pictures, special effects 
by Industrial Light & Magic,1982) and Return of the Jedi (Richard Marquand, 
Lucasfilm Ltd., special effects by Industrial Light & Magic,1983) have led to the 
development of important algorithms which became widely used.

    
Another major sponsor was the entertainment industry, lured by the 

 The latter technology was used for flight simulators and also was 

204

 Other well-known algorithms to simulate 

 And since simulators require synthetic landscapes, a lot of 

206

207

  

203

205

 

&#xC; 
176

210

  Meanwhile, Hollywood has 

209

 and "A Simple Method 

 In another early acclaimed 3D animation, produced by Kleiser-

The task of creating fully synthetic human actors has turned out to be 

 
 Along with creating particular effects for films such as star fields and 
explosions, a lot of research activity has been dedicated to the development of 
moving humanoid figures and synthetic actors. This is not surprising since 
commercial film and video productions center around human characters. 
Significantly, the first time computer animation was used in a feature film 
(Looker, Michael Cricton, Warner Brothers,1981) was to create a three-
dimensional model of an actress. One of the early attempt to simulate human 
facial expressions featured synthetic replicas of Marilyn Monroe and Humphrey 
Bogart.
Wolczak Construction Company in 1988, a synthetic human figure was 
humorously casted as Nestor Sextone, a candidate for the presidency in the 
Synthetic Actors Guild.  
 
more complex than was originally anticipated. Researchers continue to work on 
this problem. For instance, the 1992 SIGGRAPH conference presented a session 
on "Humans and Clothing" which featured such papers as "Dressing Animated 
Synthetic Actors with Complex Deformable Clothes"
for Extracting the Natural Beauty of Hair."
created a new genre of films (Terminator 2, Jurassic Park, Casper, Flubber, etc.) 
structured around "the state of the art" in digital actor simulation. In computer 
graphics it is still easier to create the fantastic and extraordinary then to simulate 
ordinary human beings. Consequently, each of these films is centered around an 
unusual character which in fact, consists of a series of special effects &mdash; morphing 
into different shapes, exploding into particles, and so on.   
 
The preceding analysis applies to the period during which the techniques 
of 3D animation were undergoing continuos development: from the middle 1970s 
to the middle 1990s. By the end of this period the software tools became 
relatively stable; at the same time, the dramatically decreased cost of hardware led 
to the significant reduction of time it takes to render complex animations. Put 
differently, the animators were now able to use more complex geometric and 
rendering models, thus achieving stronger reality effect. Titanic (1997) featured 
hundreds of computer animated &ldquo;extras&rdquo; while %95 of Stars Wars: Episode 1 
(1999) were constructed on a computer. However, the dynamics which 
characterized the early period of pre-rendered computer animation returned in 
new areas of new media: computer games and virtual worlds (such as VRML and 
Active Worlds scenes) which all use computer animation being generated in real-
time. Here Bazinian evolution towards fuller and fuller realism which 
characterized the development of computer animation in the 1970s and the 1980s 
was replayed once again at a accelerated speed. As the speed of CPUs and 
graphics card kept increasing, computer games moved from flat shading of the 
original Doom (1993) to the more detailed world of Unreal (Epic Games, 1997) 

208

 

&#xC; 
177

which featured shadows, reflections and transparency. In the area of virtual 
worlds which were designed to run on typical computers without specialized 
graphics accelerators, the same evolution proceeded at a much slower pace. 
 
 
The icons of mimesis 
 
     While the privileging of certain areas in research can be attributed to the needs 
of the sponsors, other areas received consistent attention for a different reason. To 
support the idea of progress of computer graphics toward realism, researchers 
privilege particular subjects that culturally connote the mastery of illusionistic 
representation.  

Historically, the idea of illusionism has been connected with the success in 

representation of certain subjects. The original episode in the history of Western 
painting, which I already invoked, is the story of the competition of Zeuxis and 
Parrhasiuss. The grapes painted by Zeuxis symbolize his skill to create living 
nature out of inanimate matter of paint. Further examples in the history of art 
include the celebration of the mimetic skill of those painters who were able to 
simulate another symbol of living nature &mdash; the human flesh. Not surprisingly, 
throughout the history of computer animation, the simulation of a human figure 
served as a yardstick used to measure the progress of the whole field. 

While the painting tradition had its own iconography of subjects connoting 

211

mimesis, moving image media relied on different set of subjects. Steven Neale 
describes how early film demonstrated its authenticity by representing moving 
nature: "What was lacking [in photographs] was the wind, the very index of real, 
natural movement. Hence 
the obsessive contemporary fascination, not just with movement, not just with 
scale, but also with waves and sea spray, with smoke and spray."
 Computer 
graphics researchers resort to similar subjects to signify the realism of animation. 
"Moving nature" presented at SIGGRAPH conferences have included animations 
of smoke, fire, sea 
 These privileged signs of realism overcompensate 
waves, and moving grass.
for the inability of computer graphics researches to fully simulate "real scenes." 

In summary, the differences between cinematic  and synthetic realism 
begin on the level of ontology. New realism is partial and uneven, rather than 
analog and uniform. The artificial reality which can be simulated with 3D 
computer graphics is fundamentally incomplete, full of gaps and white spots.  
 
Who determines what will be filled and what will remain a gap in the 
simulated world? As I already noted, the available computer graphics techniques 
reflect particular military and industrial needs which paid for their developments. 
The ability of certain subjects to connote mastery of illusionism also makes 
researchers pay more attention to some areas on the &ldquo;map&rdquo; and ignore others. In 

212

 

&#xC; 
178

213

214

The amount of labor involved in constructing reality from scratch in a 

addition, as computer graphics techniques migrate from specialized markets 
towards mass consumers, they become biased in yet another way.   
 
computer makes it hard to resist the temptation to utilize pre-assembled, 
standardized objects, characters and behaviors readily provided by software 
manufacturers &mdash; fractal landscapes, checkerboard floors, complete characters, 
and so on. As discussed in &ldquo;selection&rdquo; section, every program comes with 
libraries of ready-to-use models, effects or even complete animations. For 
instance, a user of the Dynamation program (a part of the popular 
Alias|Wavefront 3D software) can access complete pre-assembled animations of 
moving hair, rain, a comet's tail or smoke, with a single mouse click. If even 
professional designers rely on ready-made objects and animations, the end users 
of virtual worlds on the Internet, who usually don't have graphic or programming 
skills, have no other choice. Not surprisingly, VRML software companies and 
Web virtual world providers encourage users to choose from the libraries of  3D 
objects and avatars they supply. Worlds Inc., the provider of Worlds software 
used to create online virtual 3D chat environments, provides its users with a 
library of 100 3D avatars.
based environments on the Internet&rdquo; allows its over one million users (April 1999 
data) to choose from over 1000 different worlds, some of which are provided by a 
company and others were built by the users themselves.
 As the complexity of 
these words increases, we can expect a whole market for detailed virtual sets, 
characters with programmable behaviors, and even complete environments (a bar 
with customers, a city square, a famous historical episode, etc.) from which a user 
can put together her or his own "unique" virtual world. And although companies 
such as Active Worlds provide end users with software which allows them to 
quickly build and customize their virtual dwellings, avatars and whole virtual 
universes, each of these constructs has to adhere to standards established by the 
company. Thus behind the freedom on the surface lies standardization on a deeper 
level. While a hundred years ago the user of a Kodak camera was asked just to 
push a button, she still had the freedom to point the camera at anything.  Now, 
"you push the button, we do the rest" has become "you push the button, we create 
your world." 

 The Active Worlds which offers &ldquo;3D community 

I hope that this section demonstrated that the accounts of realism 

developed in film theory can be usefully employed to talk about realism in new 
media. But that does not mean that the question of computer realism is exhausted. 
In the twentieth century, new technologies of representation and simulation 
replace each other in rapid succession, therefore creating a perpetual lag between 
our experience of their effects and our understanding of this experience. Reality 
effect of a moving image is a case in point. As film scholars were producing 
increasingly detailed studies of cinematic realism, film itself was already being 

 

&#xC; 
179

215

   

216

   

Comolli's Machines of the Visible was given as a paper at the seminal 

Bazin's Evolution of the Language of Cinema is a compilation of three 

undermined by 3D computer animation. Indeed, consider the following 
chronology.     
 
articles written between 1952 and 1955. In 1951 the viewers of the popular 
television show "See it Now" for the first time saw a computer graphics display, 
generated by MIT computer Whirlwind, built in 1949. One animation was of a 
bouncing ball, another of a rocket's trajectory.
 
conference on the cinematic apparatus in 1978. The same year saw the publication 
of a crucial paper for the history of computer graphics research. It presented a 
method to simulate bump textures which is still one of the most powerful 
techniques of synthetic photorealism.
 
forms a part of the comprehensive The Classical Hollywood Cinema: Film Style 
& Mode of Production to 1960, published in 1985. By this year, most of the 
fundamental photorealistic techniques were discovered and turnkey computer 
animation systems were already employed by media production companies. 
 
As 3D synthetic imagery is used more and more widely in contemporary 
visual culture, the problem of realism has to be studied afresh. And while many 
theoretical accounts developed in relation do cinema do hold when applied to 
synthetic imaging, we can't assume that any concept or model can be taken for 
granted. Redefining the very concepts of representation, illusion and simulation, 
new media challenges us to understand in new ways how visual realism functions.     
 

Bordwell and Staiger's chapter Technology, Style and Mode of Production 

 

&#xC; 
180

 

Synthetic Image and its Subject    

 
 
As we saw, the achievement of photorealism is the main goal of research in the 
field of computer graphics. The field defines photorealism as the ability to 
simulate any object in such a way that its computer image is indistinguishable 
from its photograph. Since this goal was articulated in the end of the 1970s, a 
significant progress has been made towards getting closer to this goal: compare, 
for instance, the computer images of Tron (1982) with those of Star Wars: 
Episode 1 (1999). Yet the common opinion still holds that synthetic 3D images 
generated by computer graphics are not yet (or perhaps will never be) as 
&ldquo;realistic&rdquo; in rendering visual reality as images obtained through a photographic 
lens. In this section I will suggest that this common opinion is mistaken. Such 
synthetic photographs are already more &ldquo;realistic&rdquo; than traditional photographs. In 
fact, they are too real.  

This, at first sight, paradoxical argument will become less strange once we 

place the current preoccupation with photorealiasm in a longer historical 
framework, considering not only the present and recent past (computer imaging 
and analog film, respectively) but also both more distant past and the future of 
visual illusionism. For while the computer graphics field tries desperately to 
replicate the particular kind of images created by twentieth century film 
technology, these images represent only one episode in a longer history of visual 
culture. We should not assume that the history of illusion ends with 35 mm 
frames projected on the screen across the movie hall &mdash; even if a film camera is 
substituted by computer software, a film projector is substituted by a digital 
projector and the film reel itself is substituted by data transmitted over computer 
network.  
 
 
Georges M&eacute;li&egrave;s, the father of computer graphics 
 
When a future historian will write about the computerization of cinema in the 
1990s, she will highlight such movies as Terminator 2  and  Jurassic Park. Along 
with a few others, these films by John Cameron and George Lucas were 
responsible for turning Hollywood around: from still being highly skeptical about 
computer animation in the early 1990s to fully embracing it by the middle of the 
decade. These two movies, along with the host of others which followed, Titanic, 
Star Wars: Episode 1 and so on, dramatically demonstrated that total synthetic 
realism seemed to be in sight. Yet, they also exemplified the triviality of what at 
first may appear to be an outstanding technical achievement &mdash; the ability to fake 
visual reality. For what is faked is, of course, not reality but photographic reality, 

 

&#xC; 
181

217

 

reality as seen by the camera lens. In other words, what computer graphics has 
(almost) achieved is not realism, but only photorealism &mdash; the ability to fake not 
our perceptual and bodily experience of reality but only its photographic 
image.
 This image exists outside of our consciousness, on a screen &mdash; a 
window of limited size which presents a still imprint of a small part of outer 
reality, filtered through the lens with its limited depth of field, and then filtered 
through film's grain and its limited tonal range. It is only this film-based image 
which computer graphics technology has learned to simulate. And the reason we 
may think that computer graphics has succeeded in faking reality is that we, over 
the course of the last hundred and fifty years, has come to accept the image of 
photography and film as reality.  
 
What is faked is only a film-based image. Once we came to accept the 
photographic image as reality the way to its future simulation was open. What 
remained were small details: the development of digital computers (1940s) 
followed by a perspective-generating algorithm (early 1960s), and then working 
out how to make a simulated object solid with shadow, reflection and texture 
(1970s), and finally simulating the artifacts of the lens such as motion blur and 
depth of field (1980s). So, while the distance from the first computer graphics 
images circa 1960 to the synthetic dinosaurs of Jurassic Park in the 1990s is 
tremendous, we should not be too impressed. For, conceptually, photorealistic 
computer graphics had already appeared with F&eacute;lix Nadar's photographs in the 
1840s and certainly with the first films of Georges M&eacute;li&egrave;s in the 1890s. 
Conceptually, these are the inventors of 3D photorealistic computer graphics.  
 
tremendous amount of labor which today goes into creating computer-generated 
special effects. Indeed, if our civilization has any equivalent to Medieval 
cathedrals, it is special effects Hollywood films. They are truly epic both in their 
scale and the attention to detail. Assembled by thousands of highly skilled 
craftsmen over the course of years, each such movie is the ultimate display of 
collective craftsmanship we have today. But if Medieval masters left after 
themselves the material wonders of stone and glass inspired by religious faith, 
today our craftsmen leave just the pixel sets to be projected on movie theater 
screens or played on computer monitors. These are immaterial cathedrals made of 
light; and appropriately, they often still have religious references, both in the 
stories (consider for example Christian references in Star Wars: Episode 1: 
Skywalker was conceived without a father, etc.) and in the grandeur and 
transcendence of virtual sets. 
 
 
Jurassic Park and Socialist Realism 
 

In saying this I do not want to negate the human ingenuity and the 

 

&#xC; 
182

Typical images produced with 3D computer graphics still appear 

Consider one of these immaterial cathedrals: George Lucas&rsquo;s Jurassic Park. This 
triumph of computer simulation took more than two years of work by dozens of 
designers, animators, and programmers of Industrial Light and Magic (ILM), one 
of the premier company specializing in the production of computer animation for 
feature films in the world today. Because a few seconds of computer animation 
often requires months and months of work, only the huge budget of a Hollywood 
blockbuster could pay for such extensive and highly detailed computer generated 
scenes as seen in Jurassic Park. Most of the 3D computer animation produced 
today has a much lower degree of photorealism and this photorealism, as I shown 
in the previous section, is uneven, higher for some kinds of objects and lower for 
others. And even for ILM photorealistic simulation of human beings, the ultimate 
goal of computer animation, still remains impossible. (Some scenes in 1997 
Titanic feature hundreds of synthetic human figures, yet they appear for a few 
seconds and are quite small, being far away from the camera.)    
 
unnaturally clean, sharp, and geometric looking. Their limitations especially stand 
out when juxtaposed with a normal photograph. Thus one of the landmark 
achievements of Jurassic Park was the seamless integration of film footage of real 
scenes with computer simulated objects. To achieve this integration, computer-
generated images had to be degraded; their perfection had to be diluted to match 
the imperfection of film's graininess.  
 
First, the animators needed to figure out the resolution at which to render 
computer graphics elements. If the resolution were too high, the computer image 
would have more detail than the film image and its artificiality would become 
apparent. Just as Medieval masters guarded their painting secrets now leading 
computer graphics companies carefully guard the resolution of image they 
simulate. 
 
additional tricks are used to diminish their perfection. With the help of special 
algorithms, the straight edges of computer-generated objects are softened. Barely 
visible noise is added to the overall image to blend computer and film elements. 
Sometimes, as in the final battle between the two protagonists in Terminator 2, 
the scene is staged in a particular location (in this example, a smoky factory) 
which justifies addition of smoke or fog to further blend the film and synthetic 
elements together. 
 
So, while we normally think that synthetic photographs produced with 
computer graphics are inferior to real photographs, in fact, they are too perfect. 
But beyond that we can also say that paradoxically they are also too real. 
The synthetic image is free of the limitations of both human and camera 
 
vision. It can have unlimited resolution and an unlimited level of detail. It is free 
of the depth-of-field effect, this inevitable consequence of the lens, so everything 
is in focus. It is also free of grain &mdash; the layer of noise created by film stock and 
by human perception. Its colors are more saturated and its sharp lines follow the 

Once computer-generated images are combined with film images 

 

&#xC; 
183

Whose vision is it? It is the vision of a computer, a cyborg, a automatic 

Is this a totally new situation? Was there already an aesthetics which 

By the same logic, we should not consider clean, skinless, too flexible, and 

economy of geometry. From the point of view of human vision it is hyperreal. 
And yet, it is completely realistic. Synthetic image is a result of a different, more 
perfect than human, vision.  
 
missile. It is a realistic representation of human vision in the future when it will be 
augmented by computer graphics and cleansed from noise. It is the vision of a 
digital grid. Synthetic computer-generated image is not an inferior representation 
of our reality, but a realistic representation of a different reality. 
 
in the same time too jerky, human figures in 3D computer animation as 
unrealistic, as imperfect approximation to the real thing &mdash; our bodies. They are 
perfectly realistic representation of a cyborg body yet to come, of a world reduced 
to geometry, where efficient representation via a geometric model becomes the 
basis of reality. The synthetic image simply represents the future. In other words, 
if a traditional photograph always points to the past event, a synthetic photograph 
points to the future event. 
 
consistently pointed to the future? In order to help us locate this aesthetics 
histroically, I will invoke a painting by Russian-born conceptual artists Komar 
and Melamud. Called &ldquo;Bolsheviks Returning Home after a Demonstration&rdquo; 
(1981-1982), it depicts two workers, one carrying a red flag, who came across a 
tiny dinosaur, smaller than a human hand, standing in the snow. Part of &ldquo;Nostalgic 
Socialist Realism&rdquo; series, this painting was created a few years after the painters 
arrived to the United States, well before Hollywood embraced computer-
generated visuals. Yet it seems to comment on such movies as Jurassic Park and 
on Hollywood as a whole, connecting its fictions with the fictions of Soviet 
history as depicted by Socialist Realism, the official style of Soviet art from the 
early 1930s until the late 1950s.    
 
the aesthetics of Jurassic Park. This aesthetic is one of Soviet Socialist Realism. 
Socialist Realism wanted to show the future in the present by projecting the 
perfect world of future socialist society on a visual reality familiar to the viewer 
&mdash; streets, interiors and faces of Russia in the middle of the twentieth century &mdash; 
tired and underfed, scared and exhausted from fear, unkempt and gray. Socialist 
realism had to retain enough of then everyday reality while showing how that 
reality would look in the future when everyone's body will be healthy and 
muscular, every street modern, every face transformed by the spirituality of 
communist ideology. This is its difference from pure science fiction which does 
not have to carry any feature of today reality into the future. In contrast, Socialist 
realism had to superimpose future into the present, projecting the Communist 
ideal into the very different reality familiar to the viewers. Importantly, Socialist 
Realism never depicted this future directly: there is not a single Socialist Realist 
work of art set in the future. Science fiction as a genre did not exist from early 

Taking the hint from this panting, we are now in a position to characterize 

 

&#xC; 
184

1930s until Stalin&rsquo;s death. The idea was not to make the workers dream about the 
perfect future closing their eyes to imperfect reality, but rather to make them see 
the signs of this future in the reality around them. This is one of the meanings 
behind Vertov&rsquo;s notion of &ldquo;communist decoding of the world.&rdquo; To decode the 
world in such a way means to recognize the future all around you.  
 
The same superimposition of future onto the present happens in Jurassic 
Park. It tries to show the future of sight itself &mdash; the perfect cyborg vision which 
is free of noise and capable of grasping infinite details. This vision is exemplified 
by the original computer graphics images before they were blended with film 
images. But just as Socialist Realist paintings blended the perfect future with the 
imperfect reality, Jurassic Park blends the future super-vision of computer 
graphics with the familiar vision of film image. In Jurassic Park, the computer 
image bends down before the film image, its perfection is undermined by every 
possible means and is also masked by the film's content. As I already described, 
computer generated images, originally clean and sharp, free of focus and grain, 
are degraded in a variety of ways: resolution is reduced, edges are softened, depth 
of field and grain effect are artificially added. Additionally, the very content of 
the film &mdash; the prehistoric dinosaurs which came to life &mdash; can be interpreted as 
another way to mask the potentially disturbing reference to our cyborg future. The 
dinosaurs are present to tell us that computer images belong safely to the past long 
gone &mdash; even though we have every reason to believe that they are messengers 
from the future still to come. 

In that respect Jurassic Park and Terminator 2 are the opposites. If in 

Jurassic Park the dinosaurs function to convince us that computer imagery 
belongs to the past, the Terminator in Terminator 2 is more &ldquo;honest.&rdquo; He himself 
is a messenger from the future. Accordingly, he is a cyborg who can take on the 
human appearance. His true from is that of a futuristic alloy. In perfect 
correspondence with this logic, this form is represented with computer graphics. 
While his true body perfectly reflects its surrounding reality, the very nature of 
these reflection shows to us the future of human and machine sight. The 
reflections are extra-sharp and clean, without any blur. This is indeed the look 
produced by the reflection mapping algorithm, one of the standard techniques to 
achieve photorealism. Thus,  to represent the Terminator who came from the 
future the designers used the standard computer graphics techniques without 
degrading them; in contrast, in Jurassic Park the dinosaurs which came from the 
past were created by systematically degrading computer images. What of course 
is the past in this movie is the film medium itself: its grain, its depth of focus, its 
motion blur, its low resolution.  
 
images are not inferior to the visual realism of traditional photography. They are 
perfectly real &mdash; all too real. 
 
 

This is, then, the paradox of 3D photorealistic computer animation. Its 

 

&#xC; 
185

 

Illusion, Narrative and Interactivity  

In this section I will focus on a particular aspect of this more general 

 
Having analyzed computer illusionism from the points of view of its production 
and the longer history of visual illusion, I now want to look at it from a different 
perspective. While the existing theories of illusionism assume that the subject acts 
strictly a viewer, the new media more often than not turns the subject into the 
user. The subject is expected to interact with a representation: click on menus or 
the image itself, making selections and decisions. What effect does interactivity 
has on reality effect of an image? Is the fidelity of simulation of physical laws or 
human motivation more important for &ldquo;realism&rdquo; of a representation than its purely 
visual qualities? For instance, is a racing game which uses a more precise 
collision model but poor visuals feels more real than the game which has richer 
images but less precise model? Or do the simulation dimensions and visual 
dimensions support each other, adding up to create a total effect?   
 
question:  production of illusionism in interactive computer objects. The aspect 
which I will consider has to do with time. Web sites, virtual worlds, computer 
games and many other types of hypermedia applications are characterized by a 
peculiar temporal dynamic: constant, repetitive shifts between an illusion and its 
suspense. These new media objects keep reminding us about their artificiality, 
incompleteness, and constructedness. They present us with a perfect illusion only 
to reveal the underlying machinery next. 
 
be spending equal time looking at a page and waiting for the next page to 
download. During waiting periods, the act of communication itself &mdash; bits 
traveling through the network &mdash; becomes the message. The user keeps checking 
whether the connection is being made, glancing back and forth between the 
animated icon and the status bar. Using Roman Jakobson's model of 
communication functions, we can say that communication comes to be dominated 
by contact, or phatic function &mdash; it is centered around the physical channel and the 
very act of connection between the addresser and the addressee.
 
order to check whether the channel works, address each other: "Do you hear 
me?," "Do you understand me?" But in Web communication there is no human 
addresser, only a machine. So as the user keeps checking whether the information 
is coming, she actually addresses the machine itself. Or rather, the machine 
addresses the user. The machine reveals itself, it reminds the user of its existence 
&mdash; not only because the user is forced to wait but also because she is forced to 
witness how the message is being constructed over time. A page fills in part by 
part, top to bottom; text comes before images; images arrive in low resolution and 

Jakobson writes about verbal communication between two people who, in 

Web surfing in the 1990s provides a perfect example. A typical user may 

218

      

 

&#xC; 
186

Interaction with most 3D virtual worlds is characterized by the same 

Navigating a QuickTime VR movie is characterized by a similar dynamic. 

are gradually refined. Finally, everything comes together in a smooth sleek image 
&mdash; the image which will be destroyed with the next click.    
 
temporal dynamic. Consider the technique called "distancing" or "level of detail," 
which for years has been used in VR simulations and later was adapted to 3D 
games and VRML scenes. The idea is to render the models more crudely when 
the user is moving through virtual space; when the user stops, details gradually fill 
in. Another variation of the same technique involves creating a number of models 
of the same object, each with progressively less detail. When the virtual camera is 
close to an object, a highly detailed model is used; if the object is far away, a 
lesser detailed version is substituted to save unnecessary computation.   
 
A virtual world which incorporates these techniques has a fluid ontology 
that is affected by the actions of the user. As the user navigates through space the 
objects switch back and forth between pale blueprints and fully fleshed out 
illusions. The immobility of a subject guarantees a complete illusion; the slightest 
movement destroys it.   
 
In contrast to the nineteenth century panorama that it closely emulates, 
QuickTime VR continuously deconstructs its own illusion. The moment you 
begin to pan through the scene, the image becomes jagged. And, if you try to 
zoom into the image, all you get are oversized pixels. The representational 
machine keeps hiding and revealing itself.      
 
at all costs to maintain the continuity of the illusion for the duration of the 
performance. In contrast to such totalizing realism, new media aesthetics has a 
surprising affinity to twentieth century leftist avant-garde aesthetics. Playwright 
Bertold Brecht's strategy to reveal the conditions of an illusion's production, 
echoed by countless other leftist artists, has become embedded in hardware and 
software themselves. Similarly, Walter Benjamin's concept of "perception in the 
state of distraction"
 has found a perfect realization. The periodic reappearance 
of the machinery, the continuous presence of the communication channel in the 
message prevent the subject from falling into the dream world of illusion for very 
long, making her alternate between concentration and detachment.   
 
While virtual machinery itself already acts as an avant-garde director, the 
designers of interactive media, such as games, DVD titles, interactive cinema, and 
interactive television programs, often consciously attempt to structure the 
subject's temporal experience as a series of periodic shifts. The subject is forced 
to oscillate between the roles of viewer and user, shifting between perceiving and 
acting, between following the story and actively participating in it. During one 
segment the computer screen presents the viewer with an engaging cinematic 
narrative. Suddenly the image freezes, menus and icons appear and the viewer is 
forced to act: make choices; click; push buttons. The most pure example of such 

Compare this dynamic to traditional cinema or realist theater which aims 

219

 

&#xC; 
187

220

 Three-dimensional space becomes 

The effect of these shifts on the subject is hardly one of liberation and 

cyclical organization of user&rsquo;s experience is the computer games which alternate 
between FMV (full motion video) segments and the segments which require 
user&rsquo;s input, such as Wing Commander series. Moscow media theorist Anatoly 
Prokhorov described these shifts in terms of two different identities of a computer 
screen: transparent and opague. The screen keeps shifting from being transparent 
to being opaque &mdash; from a window into a fictional 3D universe to a solid surface, 
full of menus, controls, text and icons.
surface; a photograph becomes a diagram; a character becomes an icon. To use 
the opposition introduced in &ldquo;Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; section, we can say that the 
screen keeps alternates between the dimensions of representation and control. 
What at one moment was a fictional universe becomes a set of buttons which 
demand action. 
 
enlightenment. While modernist avant-garde theater and film directors 
deliberately highlighted machinery and conventions involved in producing and 
keeping the illusion in their works &mdash; for instance, having actors directly address 
the audience or pulling away the camera to show the crew and the set &mdash; the 
systematic &ldquo;auto-deconstruction&rdquo; performed by computer objects, applications, 
interfaces and hardware does not seem to distract the user from giving in to the 
reality effect. The cyclical shifts between illusion and its destruction appear to 
neither distract from it nor support it. It is tempting to compare these temporal 
shifts to shot / counter-shot structure in cinema and to understand them as a new 
kind of suturing mechanism. By having periodically to complete the interactive 
text through active participation the subject is interpolated in it. Thus, if we adopt 
the notion of suture, it would follow that the periodic shifts between illusion and 
its suspension are necessary to fully involve the subject in the illusion.
 
realism of analog era. We can call this new realism meta-realism since it 
incorporates its own critique inside itself. It emergence can be related to a larger 
cultural change. Old realism corresponded to the functioning of ideology during 
modernity: totalization of a semiotic field, "false consciousness," complete 
illusion. But today ideology functions differently: it continuously and skillfully 
deconstructs itself, presenting the subject with countless "scandals" and 
"investigations." The leaders of the middle of the twentieth century were 
presented as invincible; as being always right, and, in the case of Stalin and 
Hitler, as true saints not capable of any human sin. Today we expect to learn 
about the scandals involving our leaders, and these scandals do not really 
diminish their credibility. Similarly, contemporary television commercials often 
make fun of themselves and advertising in general; this does not prevent them 
from selling whatever they are designed to sell. Auto-critique, scandal, revelation 
of its machinery became a new structural component of modern ideology: witness 
the 1998 episode when MTV created an illusion on its Web site that somebody 

Yet clearly we are dealing with something which goes beyond old-style 

221

  

 

&#xC; 
188

hacked it. The ideology does not demand that the subject blindly beliefs it, as it 
did early in the twentieth century; rather, it puts the subject in a master position of 
somebody who knows very well that she is being fooled, and generously lets her 
be fooled. You know, for instance, that creating a unique identity through a 
commercially mass produced style is meaningless &mdash; but anyway you buy the 
expensively styled clothes, choosing from a menu: &ldquo;military,&rdquo; &ldquo;bohemian,&rdquo; 
&ldquo;flower child,&rdquo; &ldquo;inner city, &ldquo; clubbing,&rdquo; and so on. The periodic shifts between 
illusion and its suspension in interactive media, described here, can be seen as 
another example of the same general phenomenon. Just as classical ideology, 
classical realism demanded that the subject completely accepted the illusion for as 
along as it lasted. In contrast, the new meta-realism is based on oscillation 
between illusion and its destruction, between immersing a viewer in illusion and 
directly addressing her. In fact, the user is even put in much stronger position of 
mastery when she ever is by &ldquo;auto-deconstructing&rdquo; commercials, newspaper 
reports of &ldquo;scandals&rdquo; and other traditional non-interactive media. Once illusion 
stops, the user can make choices, re-direct game narrative or get additional 
information from other Web sites conveniently linked by the designers. The user 
invests into illusion precisely because she is given control over it. 

If this analysis is correct, the counter-arguments that this oscillation is 

This may explain the popularity of this particular temporal dynamics in 

simply an artifact of the current technology and that the advances in hardware will 
eliminate it, would not work. The oscillation analyzed here is not an artifact of 
computer technology but a structural feature of modern society, present not just in 
interactive media but in numerous other social realms and on many different 
levels. 
 
interactive media, but it does not address another question: does it work 
aesthetically? Can Brett and Hollywood be married? Is it possible to create a new 
temporal aesthetics, even a language, based on cyclical shifts between perception 
and action? In my view, the most successful example of such an aesthetics already 
in existence is a military simulator, the only mature form of interactive narrative. 
It perfectly blends perception and action, cinematic realism and computer menus. 
The screen presents the subject with an illusionistic virtual world while 
periodically demanding quick actions: shooting at the enemy; changing the 
direction of a vehicle; and so on. In this art form, the roles of a viewer and a 
actant are blended perfectly &mdash; but there is a price to pay. The narrative is 
organized around a single and clearly defined goal: staying alive. 
 
The games modeled after simulators &mdash; first of all, first person shooters 
such as Doom, Quake and Tomb Rider, but also flight and racing simulators &mdash; 
have been also quite successful. In contrast to interactive narratives such as Wing 
Commander, Myst, Riven, or Bad Day on the Midway which are based on 
temporal oscillation between two distinct states, non-interactive movie-like 
presentation and interactive game play, in these games these two states &mdash; which 
are also two states of the subject (perception and action) and the two states of a 

 

&#xC; 
189

screen (transparent and opaque) &mdash; co-exist together. As you run through the 
corridors shooting at enemies or control the car on the racetrack, you also keep 
your eyes on the readouts which tell about the &ldquo;health&rdquo; of your character, the 
damage level of your vehicle, the availability of ammunition, and so on. 
 
As a conclusion, I would like to offer a different interpretation of the 
temporal oscillation in new media which will relate it not to the social realm 
outside of new media but to other similar effects specific to new media itself. The 
oscillation between illusionary segments and interactive segments forces the user 
to switch between different mental sets &mdash; different kinds of cognitive activity. 
These switches are typical of using modern computer use in general. The user 
analyses the quantitative data; next she is using a search engine; next she starts a 
new application; next she navigates through space in a computer game; next she 
may go back to using a search engine; and so on. In fact, the modern HCI which 
allows the user to run a number of programs at the same time and to keep a 
number of windows open on the screen at once posits multi-tasking as the social 
and cognitive norm. This multi-tasking demands from the user &ldquo;cognitive multi-
tasking&rdquo; &mdash; rapidly alternating between different kinds of attention, problem 
solving and other cognitive skills. All in all, modern computing requires from a 
user intellectual problem solving, systematic experimentation and the quick 
learning of new tasks. Thus, just as any particular software application is 
embedded, both metaphorically and literally, within the larger framework of the 
operating system, new media embeds cinema-style illusions within the larger 
framework of an interactive control surface. Illusion is subordinated to action; 
depth to surface; a window into an imaginary universe to a control panel. From 
commanding a dark movie theater, this twentieth century illusion and therapy 
machine par exellance, a cinema image becomes just a small window on a 
computer screen; one stream among many others coming to us through the 
network; one file among numerous others on our hard drives. 
 

 

&#xC; 
190

 

V. The Forms 

222

 The 

 
 
August 5, 1999. I am sitting in the lobby of Razorfish Studios, which was named 
by Adweek among 10 top interactive agencies in the world for 1998.
company&rsquo;s story is Silicon Alley legend. It was founded in 1995 by two partners 
in their East Village loft; by 1997 it had 45 employees; by 1999 the number grew 
to 600 (this includes a number of companies around the world Razorfish 
acquired). Razorfish projects range from screen savers to Charles Shwabb online 
trading Web site. At the time of my visit, the studios are housed in two floors of a 
building on Grand Street in Soho, between Broadway and Mercer, a few blacks 
from Prada, Hugo Boss and other designer shops. Open space houses loosely 
positioned workspaces occupied mostly by 20-something (although I notice a 
busy programmer who can&rsquo;t be older then 18). The design of the space functions 
(intentionally so) as a metaphor for computer culture&rsquo;s key themes: interactivity,  
lack of hierarchy, modularity. In contrast to traditional office architecture were 
the reception area acts as a getaway between the visitor and the company, here 
this desk looks like just another workstation, set aside from the entrance. On 
entering the space you can go the reception desk or you can directly make your 
way to any workstation on the floor. Stylishly dressed 20-somethings of both 
genders appear and disappear in the elevator at regular intervals. It is pretty quite, 
except the little noises made by numerous computers as they save and retrieve 
files. One of the co-founders, still in his early 30s, gives me a quick tour of the 
place. Although Razorfish is the established design leader in the virtual world of 
computer screens and networks, our tour is focused on the physical world. He 
proudly points out that the workers are scattered around the open space regardless 
of their job titles: a programmer next to interface designer next to Web designer. 
He notes that the reception area composed of a desk and two semi-circular sofas 
mimics the image &mdash; Razorfish logo. He talks about Razorfish plans to venture 
into product design. &ldquo;Our goal is to provide total user experience. Right now a 
client thinks that if he needs the design for buttons on the screen, he hires 
Razorfish; but if he needs real buttons, he goes to another shop. We want to 
change this.&rdquo;  

The original 1970s paradigm of Graphical User Interface (GUI) emulated 

familiar physical interfaces: a file cabinet, a desk, a trash can, a control panel. 
After leaving Razorfish Studios, I stop at Venus by Patricia Field, a funky store 
on West Broadway where I buy an orange and blue valet which has two plastic 
buttons on its cover, an emulation of forward and reverse buttons of a Web 
browser. The buttons do not do anything (yet); they simply signify &ldquo;computer.&rdquo; 
Over the course of twenty years, the culture came full circle. If, with GUI, the 

 

&#xC; 
191

physical environment migrated into computer screen, now the conventions of GUI 
are migrating back into our physical reality. The same trajectory can be traced in 
relation to other conventions, or forms, of computer media. A collection of 
documents and a navigable space, these traditional methods to organize both data 
and human experience of the world itself, became two of these forms which today 
can be found in most areas of new media. The first form is a database, used to 
store any kind of data &mdash; from financial records to digital movie clips; the second 
form is a virtual interactive 3D space, employed in computer games, motion rides, 
VR, computer animation, and human-computer interfaces. In migrating to a 
computer environment, a collection and navigable space were not left unchanged; 
on the contrary, they came to incorporate computer&rsquo;s particular techniques for 
structuring and accessing data, such as modularity, as well as its fundamental 
logic: that of computer programming. So, for instance, a computer database is 
quite different from a traditional collection of documents: it allows to quickly 
access, sort and re-organize millions of records; it can contain different media 
types, and it assumes multiple indexing of data, since each record besides the data 
itself contains a number of fields with user-defined values.  

 Today, in a perfect illustration of the transcoding principle (see Chapter 

) And, with many computer games, the human 

1),  these two computer-based forms migrate back into culture at large, both 
literally and conceptually. A library, a museum, in fact, any large collection of 
cultural data are being substituted by a computer database. At the same time, a 
computer database becomes a new metaphor which we use to conceptualize 
individual and collective cultural memory, a collection of documents or objects, 
and other phenomena and experiences. Similarly, computer culture uses 3D 
navigable space to visualize any kind of data &mdash; molecules and historical records, 
files in a computer, the Internet as a whole, and the semantics of human language. 
(For instance, the software from plumbdesign renders English thesaurus as a 
structure in 3D space.
experience of being in a world and the narrative itself are being represented as 
continuos navigation through space (think, for example, of Tomb Rider).  In short, 
a computer database and 3D computer-based virtual space became true cultural 
forms &mdash; general ways used by culture to represent the human experience, the 
world, and human existence in this world. 
 
possibilities?
 We may associate the first genre with work (post-industrial labor 
of information processing) and the second with leisure and fun (computer games), 
yet this very distinction is no longer valid in computer culture. As I already noted 
in the introduction to &ldquo;Interface&rdquo; chapter, increasingly the same metaphors and 
interfaces are used at work and at home, for business and for entertainment. For 
instance, the user navigates through a virtual space both to work and to play, 
whether analyzing scientific data or killing enemies in Quake. 

Why does computer culture privilege these forms over other 

223

224

 

&#xC; 
192

We may arrive at a better explanation if we look at how these two forms 

Sometimes either of these two goals, information access and psychological 

 
are used in new media design. From one perspective, all new media design can be 
reduced to these two approach. That is, creating works in new media can be 
understood as either constructing the right interface to a multimedia database or as 
defining navigation methods through spatialized representations. The first 
approach is typically used in self-contained hypermedia and Web sites &mdash; in short, 
whenever the main goal is to provide an interface to data. The second approach is 
used in most computer games and virtual worlds. What is the logic here? Web 
sites and hypermedia programs usually aim to give user efficient access to 
information, while games and virtual worlds aim to psychologically &ldquo;submerge&rdquo; 
the user in an imaginary universe. It is appropriate that database has emerged as 
perfect vehicle for the first goal while navigable space meets the demands of the 
second. It accomplishes the same effects which before were created by literary 
and cinematic narrative.   
 
engagement with an imaginary world, solely shapes the design of a new media 
object. The example of the former would be a search engine site; the example of a 
later would be games such as Riven or Unreal. However in general these two 
goals should be thought of as extreme cases of a single conceptual continuum. 
Such supposedly &ldquo;pure&rdquo; example of an information-oriented object as a Yahoo, 
Hotbot or other search sites aim to &ldquo;immerse&rdquo; the user in its universe, prevent her 
from going to other sites. And such supposedly pure &ldquo;psychological immersion&rdquo; 
objects as Riven or Unreal have a strong &ldquo;information processing&rdquo; dimension. 
This dimension makes playing these games more like reading a detective story or 
playing chess then being engaged with traditional literary and film fictional 
narrative. Gathering clues and treasures; constantly updating a mental map of the 
universe of the game, including the positions of pathways, doors, places to avoid 
and so on; keeping track of one&rsquo;s ammunition, health and other levels &mdash; all this 
aligns playing a computer game with other &ldquo;information processing&rdquo; tasks typical 
of computer culture, like searching Internet, scanning through news groups, 
pulling records from a database, using a spreadsheet, or data mining large data 
stores. 

Often, the two goals of information access and psychological engagement 
compete within the same new media object. Along with surface versus depth, the 
opposition between information and &ldquo;immersion&rdquo; can be thought of as particular 
expression of the more general opposition characteristic of new media: between 
action and representation. And just as it is the case with surface and depth 
opposition, discussed in &ldquo;Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; and &ldquo;Illusion, Narrative and 
Interactivity&rdquo; sections, the results of this competition are often awkward and 
uneasy. For instance, an image which embeds within itself a number of hyperlinks 
offers neither a true psychological &ldquo;immersion&rdquo; nor easy navigation since the user 
has to search for hyperlinks. Appropriately, games such as Jonny Mnemonic 
(SONY, 1995) which inspired to become true interactive movies, chosen to avoid 

 

&#xC; 
193

either imbedding hyperlinks or displaying controls on the screen altogether, 
instead relying on a keyboard the sole source of interactive control.  

Narratology, the branch of modern literary theory devoted to the theory of 
narrative, distinguishes between narration and description. Narration are parts of 
the narrative which move the plot forward; description are the parts which do not. 
The examples of description are passages which describe the landscape, or a city, 
or character&rsquo;s apartment In short, to use the language of information age, 
description passages present the reader with descriptive information. As its name 
itself implies, narratology paid most attention to narration and hardly any to 
description. But in the information age narration and description has changed 
roles. If traditional cultures provided people with well-defined narratives (myths, 
religion) and little &ldquo;stand-alone&rdquo; information, today we have too much 
information and too few narratives which can tie it all together. For better or 
worse, information access become a key activity of a computer age. Therefore, we 
need something which can be called &ldquo;info-aesthetics&rdquo; &mdash;  a theoretical analysis of 
the aesthetics of information access as well creation of new media objects which 
&ldquo;aestheticize&rdquo; information processing. In the age when all design became 
&ldquo;information design,&rdquo; and, to paraphrase the title of the famous book by the 
architectural historian Sigfried Giedion
, &ldquo;search engine takes command,&rdquo; 
information access is no longer just a key form of work but also a new key 
category of culture. Thus it demands that we deal with it theoretically, 
aesthetically and symbolically.  
  

225

 

&#xC; 
194

 

Database  

 

Why does new media favor database form over others? Can we explain its 

 
 
The Database Logic 
 
After the novel, and subsequently cinema privileged narrative as the key form of 
cultural expression of the modern age, the computer age introduces its correlate 
&mdash; database. Many new media objects do not tell stories; they don't have 
beginning or end; in fact, they don't have any development, thematically, formally 
or otherwise which would organize their elements into a sequence. Instead, they 
are collections of individual items, where every item has the same significance as 
any other.  
 
popularity by analyzing the specificity of the digital medium and of computer 
programming? What is the relationship between database and another form, 
which has traditionally dominated human culture &mdash; narrative? These are the 
questions I will address in this section. 
 
Before proceeding I need to comment on my use of the word database. In 
computer science database is defined as a structured collection of data. The data 
stored in a database is organized for fast search and retrieval by a computer and 
therefore it is anything but a simple collection of items. Different types of 
databases &mdash;  hierarchical, network, relational and object-oriented &mdash; use different 
models to organize data. For instance, the records in hierarchical databases are 
organized in a treelike structure. Object-oriented databases store complex data 
structures, called "objects," which are organized into hierarchical classes that may 
inherit properties from classes higher in the chain.
 New media objects may or 
may not employ these highly structured database models; however, from the point 
of view of user's experience a large proportion of them are databases in a more 
basic sense. They appear as a collections of items on which the user can perform 
various operations: view, navigate, search. The user experience of such 
computerized collections is therefore quite distinct from reading a narrative or 
watching a film or navigating an architectural site. Similarly, literary or cinematic 
narrative, an architectural plan and database each present a different model of 
what a world is like. It is this sense of database as a cultural form of its own 
which I want to address here. Following art historian Ervin Panofsky's analysis of 
linear perspective as a "symbolic form" of the modern age, we may even call 
database a new symbolic form of a computer age (or, as philosopher Jean-
Francois Lyotard called it in his famous 1979 book Postmodern Condition, 
 a new way to structure our experience of ourselves 
"computerized society"),
and of the world. Indeed, if after the death of God (Nietzche), the end of grand 

227

226

 

&#xC; 
195

228

 The identity of a CD-ROM as a storage media is projected onto 

Let us begin by documenting the dominance of database form in new 

Narratives of Enlightenment (Lyotard) and the arrival of the Web (Tim Berners-
Lee) the world appears to us as an endless and unstructured collection of images, 
texts, and other data records, it is only appropriate that we will be moved to model 
it as a database. But it is also appropriate that we would want to develops poetics, 
aesthetics, and ethics of this database.     
 
media. The most obvious examples of this are popular multimedia encyclopedias, 
which are collections by their very definition; as well as other commercial CD-
ROM titles which are collections as well &mdash; of recipes, quotations, photographs, 
and so on.
another plane, becoming a cultural form of its own. Multimedia works which have 
"cultural" content appear to particularly favor the database form. Consider, for 
instance, the "virtual museums" genre &mdash; CD-ROMs which take the user on a 
"tour" through a museum collection. A museum becomes a database of images 
representing its holdings, which can be accessed in different ways: 
chronologically, by country, or by artist. Although such CD-ROMs often simulate 
the traditional museum experience of moving from room to room in a continuous 
trajectory, this "narrative" method of access does not have any special status in 
comparison to other access methods offered by a CD-ROM. Thus the narrative 
becomes just one method of accessing data among others. Another example of a 
database form is a multimedia genre which does not has an equivalent in 
traditional media &mdash; CD-ROMs devoted to a single cultural figure such as a 
famous architect, film director or writer. Instead of a narrative biography we are 
presented with a database of images, sound recordings, video clips and/or texts 
which can be navigated in a variety of ways.  
 
particularly receptive to traditional genres which already had a database-like 
structure, such as a photo-album; they also inspired new database genres, like a 
database biography. Where the database form really flourished, however, is on the 
Internet. As defined by original HTML, a Web page is a sequential list of separate 
elements: text blocks, images, digital video clips, and links to other pages. It is 
always possible to add a new element to the list &mdash; all you have to do is to open a 
file and add a new line. As a result, most Web pages are collections of separate 
elements: texts, images, links to other pages or sites. A home page is a collection 
of personal photographs. A site of a major search engine is a collection of 
numerous links to other sites (along with a search function, of course). A site of a 
Web-based TV or radio station offers a collections of video or audio programs 
along with the option to listen to the current broadcast; but this current program is 
just one choice among many other programs stored on the site. Thus the 
traditional broadcasting experience, which consisted solely of a real-time 
transmission, becomes just one element in a collection of options. Similar to the 
CD-ROM medium, the Web offered fertile ground to already existing database 

CD-ROMs and other digital storage media (floppies, DVD) proved to be 

 

&#xC; 
196

Commercial producers have experimented with ways to explore the 

The open nature of the Web as medium (Web pages are computer files 

genres (for instance, bibliography) and also inspired the creation of new ones such 
as the sites devoted to a person or a phenomenon (Madonna, Civil War, new 
media theory, etc.) which, even if they contain original material, inevitably center 
around the list of links to other Web pages on the same person or phenomenon.    
 
which can always be edited) means that the Web sites never have to be complete; 
and they rarely are. The sites always grow. New links are being added to what is 
already there. It is as easy to add new elements to the end of list as it is to insert 
them anywhere in it. All this further contributes to the anti-narrative logic of the 
Web. If new elements are being added over time, the result is a collection, not a 
story. Indeed, how can one keep a coherent narrative or any other development 
trajectory through the material if it keeps changing?      
 
database form inherent to new media, with offerings ranging from multimedia 
encyclopedias, to collections of software, to collections of pornographic images. 
In contrast, many artists working with new media at first uncritically accepted the 
database form as a given. Thus they became blind victims of database logic. 
Numerous artists' Web sites are collections of multimedia elements documenting 
their works in other media. In the case of many early artists' CD-ROMs as well, 
the tendency was to fill all the available storage space with different material: the 
main work, documentation, related texts, previous works and so on.   
 
more critically.
possible aesthetics.are Chris Marker's "IMMEMORY," Olga Lialina's "Anna 
Karenina Goes to Paradise,"
 Stephen Mamber's "Digital Hitchcock," and  
Fabian Wagmister's "...two, three, many Guevaras." The artist who have explored 
possibilities of a database most systematically is George Legrady. In a series of 
interactive multimedia works ("The Anecdoted Archive," 1994; "[the clearning]," 
1994; "Slippery Traces, 1996; "Tracing," 1998) he used diffirent types of 
databases to create &ldquo;an information structure where stories/things are organized 
according to mutiple thematic connections."
 
 
Data and Algorithm 
      
Of course not all new media objects are explicitly databases. Computer games, for 
instance, are experienced by their players as narratives. In a game, the player is 
given a well-defined task &mdash; winning the match, being first in a race, reaching the 
last level, or reaching the highest score. It is this task which makes the player 
experience the game as a narrative. Everything which happens to her in a game, 
all the characters and objects she encounters either take her closer to achieving the 

As the 1990s progressed, artists increasingly begun to approach database 
 A few examples of projects investigating database politics and 

229

230

231

 

 

&#xC; 
197

232

 

Often the narrative shell of a game ("you are the specially trained 

goal or further away from it. Thus, in contrast to the CD-ROM and Web 
databases, which always appear arbitrary since the user knows that additional 
material could have been added without in any way modifying the logic of the 
database, in a game, from a user's point of view, all the elements are motivated ( 
i.e., their presence is justified).
 
commando who has just landed on a Lunar base; your task is to make your way to 
the headquarters occupied by the mutant base personnel...") masks a simple 
algorithm well-familiar to the player: kill all the enemies on the current level, 
while collecting all treasures it contains; go to the next level and so on until you 
reach the last level. Other games have different algorithms. Here is an algorithm 
of the legendary  "Tetris": when a new block appears, rotate it in such a way so it 
will complete the top layer of blocks on the bottom of the screen making this 
layer disappear. The similarity between the actions expected from the player and 
computer algorithms is too uncanny to be dismissed. While computer games do 
not follow database logic, they appear to be ruled by another logic &mdash; that of an 
algorithm. They demand that a player executes an algorithm in order to win.   
 
An algorithm is the key to the game experience in a different sense as 
well. As the player proceeds through the game, she gradually discovers the rules 
which operate in the universe constructed by this game. She learns its hidden 
logic, in short its algorithm. Therefore, in games where the game play departs 
from following an algorithm, the player is still engaged with an algorithm, albeit 
in another way: she is discovering the algorithm of the game itself. I mean this 
both metaphorically and literally: for instance, in a first person shooter, such as 
"Quake," the player may eventually notice that under such and such condition the 
enemies will appear from the left, i.e. she will literally reconstruct a part of the 
algorithm responsible for the game play. Or, in a different formulation of the 
legendary author of Sim games Will Wright, "Playing the game is a continuos 
loop between the user (viewing the outcomes and inputting decisions) and the 
computer (calculating outcomes and displaying them back to the user). The user is 
trying to build a mental model of the computer model."
 
transcoding discussed in Chapter 1: the projection of the ontology of a computer 
onto culture itself. If in physics the world is made of atoms and in genetics it is 
made of genes, computer programming encapsulates the world according to its 
own logic. The world is reduced to two kinds of software objects which are 
complementary to each other: data structures and algorithms. Any process or task 
is reduced to an algorithm, a final sequence of simple operations which a 
computer can execute to accomplish a given task. And any object in the world &mdash; 
be it the population of a city, or the weather over the course of a century, a chair, 
a human brain &mdash;  is modeled as a data structure, i.e. data organized in a particular 

What we encountered is another example of the general principle of 

233

 

 

&#xC; 
198

234

 Examples of data structures are arrays, 

The computerization of culture involves the projection of these two 

way for efficient search and retrieval.
linked lists and graphs. Algorithms and data structures have a symbiotic 
relationship. The more complex the data structure of a computer program, the 
simpler the algorithm needs to be, and vice versa. Together, data structures and 
algorithms are two halves of the ontology of the world according to a computer.   
 
fundamental parts of computer software &mdash; and of the computer's unique ontology 
&mdash; onto the cultural sphere. If CD-ROMs and Web databases are cultural 
manifestations of one half of this ontology &mdash;  data structures, then computer 
games are manifestations of the second half &mdash; algorithms. Games (sports, chess, 
cards, etc.) are one cultural form which required algorithm-like behavior from the 
players; consequently, many traditional games were quickly simulated on 
computers. In parallel, new genres of computer games came into existence such as 
a first person shooter ("Doom," "Quake"). Thus, as it was the case with database 
genres, computer games both mimic already existing games and create new game 
genres.   
 
It may appear at first sight that data is passive and algorithm is active &mdash; 
another example of passive-active binary categories so loved by human cultures. 
A program reads in data, executes an algorithm, and writes out new data. We may 
recall that before "computer science" and "software engineering" became 
established names for the computer field, it was called "data processing." This 
name remained in use for a few decades during which computers were mainly 
associated with performing calculations over data. However, the passive/active 
distinction is not quite accurate since data does not just exist &mdash; it has to be 
generated. Data creators have to collect data and organize it, or create it from 
scratch. Texts need to written, photographs need to be taken, video and audio 
need to be recorded. Or they need to be digitized from already existing media. In 
the 1990&rsquo;s, when the new role of a computer as a Universal Media Machine 
became apparent, already computerized societies went into a digitizing craze. All 
existing books and video tapes, photographs and audio recordings started to be 
fed into computers at an ever increasing rate. Steven Spielberg created the Shoah 
Foundation which videotaped and then digitized numerous interviews with 
Holocaust survivors; it would take one person forty years to watch all the 
recorded material. The editors of Mediamatic journal, who devoted a whole issue 
to the topic of "the storage mania" (Summer 1994) wrote: "A growing number of 
organizations are embarking on ambitious projects. Everything is being collected: 
culture, asteroids, DNA patterns, credit records, telephone conversations; it 
doesn't matter."
gigabytes of data; by the Fall of 1999 this number rose to 10 terabytes.

 In 1996, financial company T. Rowe Price stored 800 
236

235

   

Once it is digitized, the data has to be cleaned up, organized, indexed. The 

computer age brought with it a new cultural algorithm: reality-> media->data-

 

&#xC; 
199

237

 Jorge Luis Borges's story about a map 

>database. The rise of the Web, this gigantic and always changing data corpus, 
gave millions of people a new hobby or profession: data indexing. There is hardly 
a Web site which does not feature at least a dozen links to other sites, therefore 
every site is a type of database. And, with the rise of Internet commerce, most 
large-scale commercial sites have become real databases, or rather front-ends to 
company databases. For instance, in the Fall of 1998, Amazon.com, an online 
book store, had 3 million books in its database; and the maker of  leading 
commercial database Oracle has offered Oracle 8i, fully integrated with the 
Internet and featuring unlimited database size, natural-language queries and 
support for all multimedia data types.
which was equal in size to the territory it represented became re-written as the 
story about indexes and the data they index. But now the map has become larger 
than the territory. Sometimes, much larger. Porno Web sites exposed the logic of 
the Web to its extreme by constantly re-using the same photographs from other 
porno Web sites. Only rare sites featured the original content. On any given date, 
the same few dozen images would appear on thousands of sites. Thus, the same 
data would give rise to more indexes than the number of data elements 
themselves.   
 
 
Database and Narrative 
  
As a cultural form, database represents the world as a list of items and it refuses to 
order this list. In contrast, a narrative creates a cause-and-effect trajectory of 
seemingly unordered items (events). Therefore, database and narrative are natural 
enemies. Competing for the same territory of human culture, each claims an 
exclusive right to make meaning out of the world. 
 
behavior from their readers. However, narratives and games are similar in that the 
user, while proceeding through them, must uncover its underlying logic &mdash; its 
algorithm. Just like a game player, a reader of a novel gradually reconstructs an 
algorithm (here I use it metaphorically) which the writer used to create the 
settings, the characters, and the events. From this perspective, I can re-write my 
earlier equations between the two parts of the computer's ontology and its 
corresponding cultural forms. Data structures and algorithms drive different forms 
of computer culture. CD-ROMs, Web sites and other new media objects which 
are organized as databases correspond to the data structure; while narratives, 
including computer games, correspond to the algorithms.  
 
they are equally important for a program to work. What happens in a cultural 
sphere? Do databases and narratives have the same status in computer culture? 

In computer programming, data structures and algorithms need each other; 

In contrast to most games, most narratives do not require algorithm-like 

 

 

&#xC; 
200

239

240

 Or she may be traversing a black and white image of a naked body, 

Some media objects explicitly follow database logic in their structure 

 
while others do not; but behind the surface practically all of them are databases. 
In general, creating a work in new media can be understood as the construction of 
an interface to a database. In the simplest case, the interface simply provides the 
access to the underlying database. For instance, an image database can be 
represented as a page of miniature images; clicking on a miniature will retrieve 
the corresponding record. If a database is too large to display all of its records at 
once, a search engine can be provided to allow the user to search for particular 
records. But the interface can also translate the underlying database into a very 
different user experience. The user may be navigating a virtual three-dimensional 
city composed from letters, as in Jeffrew Shaw's interactive installation "Legible 
City."
activating pieces of text, audio and video embedded in its skin (Harwood's CD-
ROM "Rehearsal of Memory.")
 Or she may be playing with virtual animals 
which come closer or run away depending upon her movements (Scott Fisher et 
al, VR installation, "Menagerie.")
 Although each of these works engages the 
user in a set of behaviors and cognitive activities which are quite distinct from 
going through the records of a database, all of them are databases. "Legible City" 
is a database of three-dimensional letters which make up the city. "Rehearsal of 
Memory" is a database of texts and audio and video clips which are accessed 
through the interface of a body. And "Menagerie" is a database of virtual animals, 
including their shapes, movements and behaviors.   
Database becomes the center of the creative process in the computer age. 
 
Historically, the artist made a unique work within a particular medium. Therefore 
the interface and the work were the same; in other words, the level of an interface 
did not exist. With new media, the content of the work and the interface become 
separate. It is therefore possible to create different interfaces to the same material. 
These interfaces may present different versions of the same work, as in David 
Blair's WaxWeb.
 Or they may be radically different from each other, as in 
Moscow WWWArt Centre.
discussed principle of variability of new media manifests itself. But now we can 
give this principle a new formulation. The new media object consists of one or 
more interfaces to a database of multimedia material. If only one interface is 
constructed, the result will be similar to a traditional art object; but this is an 
exception rather than the norm.  
 
new light, thus redefining our concept of narrative. The "user" of a narrative is 
traversing a database, following links between its records as established by the 
database's creator. An interactive narrative (which can be also called "hyper-
narrative" in an analogy with hypertext) can then be understood as the sum of 
multiple trajectories through a database. A  traditional linear narrative is one, 

This formulation places the opposition between database and narrative in a 

241

242

 This is one of the ways in which the already 

238

 

&#xC; 
201

among many other possible trajectories; i.e. a particular choice made within a 
hyper-narrative. Just as a traditional cultural object can now be seen as a 
particular case of a new media object (i.e., a new media object which only has one 
interface), traditional linear narrative can be seen as a particular case of a hyper-
narrative.  
 
This "technical," or "material" change in the definition of narrative does 
not mean that an arbitrary sequence of database records is a narrative. To qualify 
as a narrative, a cultural object has to satisfy a number of criteria, which cultural 
theorist Mieke Bal, the author of a standard textbook on narrative theory, defines 
as follows: it should contain both an actor and a narrator; it also should contain 
three distinct levels consisting of the text, the story, and the fabula; and its 
"contents" should be "a series of connected events caused or experienced by 
actors."
 Obviously, not all cultural objects are narratives. However, in the 
world of new media, the word &ldquo;narrative&rdquo; is often used as all-inclusive term, to 
cover up the fact that we have not yet developed a language to describe these new 
strange objects. It is usually paired with another over-used word &mdash; interactive. 
Thus, a number of database records linked together so that more than one 
trajectory is possible, is assumed to be constitute "interactive narrative." But to 
just create these trajectories is of course not sufficient; the author also has to 
control the semantics of the elements and the logic of their connection so that the 
resulting object will meet the criteria of narrative as outlined above. Another 
erroneous assumption frequently made is that by creating her own path (i.e., 
choosing the records from a database in a particular order) the user constructs her 
own unique narrative. However, if the user simply accesses different elements,  
one after another, in a usually random order, there is no reason to assume that 
these elements will form a narrative at all. Indeed, why should an arbitrary 
sequence of database records, constructed by the user, result in "a series of 
connected events caused or experienced by actors"?     
 
computer culture. In the database / narrative pair, database is the unmarked  
term.
narratives, interactive narratives, databases, or something else, underneath, on the 
level of material organization, they are all databases. In new media, the database 
supports a range of cultural forms which range from direct translation (i.e., a 
database stays a database) to a form whose logic is the opposite of the logic of the 
material form itself &mdash; a narrative. More precisely, a database can support 
narrative, but there is nothing in the logic of the medium itself which would foster 
its generation. It is not surprising, then, that databases occupy a significant, if not 
the largest, territory of the new media landscape. What is more surprising is why 
the other end of the spectrum &mdash; narratives &mdash; still exist in new media. 
 
 

 Regardless of whether new media objects present themselves as linear 

In summary, database and narrative do not have the same status in 

243

244

 

&#xC; 
202

Paradigm and Syntagm 
 
The dynamics which exist between database and narrative are not unique in new 
media. The relation between the structure of a digital image and the languages of 
contemporary visual culture is characterized by the same dynamics. As defined by 
all computer software, a digital image consists of a number of separate layers, 
each layer containing particular visual elements (see &ldquo;Compositing&rdquo; section for a 
discussion of moving image compositing and its use to simulate cinematographic 
look). Throughout the production process, artists and designers manipulate each 
layer separately; they also delete layers and add new ones.  Keeping each element 
as a separate layer allows the content and the composition of an image to be 
changed at any point: deleting a background, substituting one person for another, 
moving two people closer together, blurring an object, and so on. What would a 
typical image look like if the layers were merged together? The elements 
contained on different layers will become juxtaposed resulting in a montage look. 
Montage is the default visual language of composite organization of an image. 
However, just as database supports both the database form and its opposite &mdash; 
narrative, a composite organization of an image on the material level (and 
compositing software on the level of operations) support two opposing visual 
languages. One is modernist-MTV montage &mdash; two-dimensional juxtaposition of 
visual elements designed to shock due to its impossibility in reality. The other is 
the representation of familiar reality as seen by a photo of film camera (or its 
computer simulation, in the case of 3D graphics). During the 1980s and 1990s all 
image making technologies became computer-based thus turning all images into 
composites. In parallel, a Renaissance of montage took place in visual culture, in 
print, broadcast design and new media. This is not unexpected &mdash; after all, this is 
the visual language dictated by the composite organization. What needs to be 
explained is why photorealist images continue to occupy such a significant space 
in our computer-based visual culture.  
 
disappeared completely. The history of culture does not contain such sudden 
breaks. Similarly, we should not expect that new media would completely 
substitute narrative by database. New media does not radically break with the 
past; rather, it distributes weight differently between the categories which hold 
culture together, foregrounding what was in the background, and vice versa. As 
Frederick Jameson writes in his analysis of another shift, from modernism to post-
modernism: "Radical breaks between periods do not generally involve complete 
changes but rather the restructuration of a certain number of elements already 
given: features that in an earlier period of system were subordinate became 
245
dominant, and features that had been dominant again become secondary."
 
understand how computer culture redistributes weight between the two terms of 

It would be surprising, of course, if photorealist images suddenly 

Database &mdash; narrative opposition is the case in point. To further 

  

 

&#xC; 
203

247

  This 

246

opposition in computer culture I will bring in a semiological theory of syntagm 
and paradigm. According to this model, originally formulated by Ferdinand de 
Saussure to describe natural languages such as English and later expanded by 
Roland Barthes and others to apply to other sign systems (narrative, fashion, food, 
etc.), the elements of a system can be related on two dimensions: syntagmatic and 
paradigmatic.
  As defined by Barthes, "the syntagm is a combination of signs, 
which has space as a support." To use the example of natural language, the 
speaker produces an utterance by stringing together the elements, one after 
another, in a linear sequence. This is the syntagmatic dimension. Now, lets look at 
the paradigm. To continue with an example of a language user, each new element 
is chosen from a set of other related elements. For instance, all nouns form a set; 
all synonyms of a particular word form another set. In the original formulation of 
Saussure, "the units which have something in common are associated in theory 
and thus form groups within which various relationships can be found."
is the paradigmatic dimension.  
The elements on a syntagmatic dimension are related in praesentia, while 
 
the elements on a paradigmatic dimension are related in absentia. For instance, in 
the case of a written sentence, the words which comprise it materially exist on a 
piece of paper, while the paradigmatic sets to which these words belong only exist 
in writer's and reader's minds. Similarly, in the case of a fashion outfit, the 
elements which make it, such as a skirt, a blouse, and a jacket, are present in 
reality, while pieces of clothing which could have been present instead &mdash; 
different skirt, different blouse, different jacket &mdash; only exist in the  viewer's 
imagination. Thus, syntagm is explicit and paradigm is implicit; one is real and 
the other is imagined.  
 
sentences, shots, scenes which make up a narrative have a material existence; 
other elements which form an imaginary world of an author or a particular literary 
or cinematic style and which could have appeared instead exist only virtually. Put 
differently, the database of choices from which narrative is constructed (the 
paradigm) is implicit; while the actual narrative (the syntagm) is explicit.   
 
material existence, while narrative (the syntagm) is de-materialised. Paradigm is 
privileged, syntagm is downplayed. Paradigm is real, syntagm is virtual. To see 
this, consider the new media design process. The design of any new media object 
begins with assembling a database of possible elements to be used. (Macromedia 
Director calls this database "cast," Adobe Premiere calls it "project", ProTools  
calls it a &ldquo;session," but the principle is the same.) This database is the center of 
the design process. It typically consists from a combination of original and stock 
material distributed such as buttons, images, video and audio sequences; 3D 
objects; behaviors and so on. Throughout the design process new elements are 
added to the database; existing elements are modified. The narrative is 

Literary and cinematic narratives work in the same way. Particular words, 

New media reverses this relationship. Database (the paradigm) is given 

 

&#xC; 
204

Other types of interactive interfaces make the paradigm even more explicit 

constructed by linking elements of this database in a particular order, i.e. 
designing a trajectory leading from one element to another. On the material level, 
a narrative is just a set of links; the elements themselves remain stored in the 
database. Thus the narrative is more virtual than the database itself. (Since all data 
is stored as electronic signals, the word "material" seem to be no longer 
appropriate. Instead we should talk about different degrees of virtuality.)  
 
The paradigm is privileged over syntagm in yet another way in interactive 
objects presenting the user with a number of choices at the same time &mdash; which is 
what typical interactive interfaces do. For instance, a screen may contain a few 
icons; clicking on each icon leads the user to a different screen. On the level of an 
individual screen, these choices form a paradigm of their own which is explicitly 
presented to the user. On the level of the whole object, the user is made aware that 
she is following one possible trajectory among many others. In other words, she is 
selecting one trajectory from the paradigm of all trajectories which are defined.  
 
by presenting the user with an explicit menu of all available choices. In such 
interfaces, all of the categories are always available, just a mouse click away. The 
complete paradigm is present before the user, its elements neatly arranged in a 
menu. This is another example of how new media makes explicit the 
psychological processes involved in cultural communication. Other examples 
include the already discussed shift from creation to selection, which externalizes 
and codifies the database of cultural elements existing in the  creator's mind; as 
well as the very phenomena of interactive links.  As I noted in Chapter 1, new 
media takes "interaction" literally, equating it with a strictly physical interaction 
between a user and a computer, at the sake of psychological interaction. The 
cognitive processes involved in understanding any culltural text are erroneously 
equated with an objectively existing structure of interactive links.   
 
make explicit paradigmatic sets. Yet, they are still organized along the 
syntagmatic dimension.  Although the user is making choices at each new screen, 
the end result is a linear sequence of screens which she follows. This is the 
classical syntagmatic experience. In fact, it can be compared to constructing a 
sentence in a natural language. Just as a language user constructs a sentence by 
choosing each successive word from a paradigm of other possible words, a new 
media user creates a sequence of screens by clicking on this or that icon at each 
screen. Obviously, there are many important differences between these two 
situations. For instance, in the case of a typical interactive interface, there is no 
grammar and paradigms are much smaller. Yet, the similarity of basic experience 
in both cases is quite interesting; in both cases, it unfolds along a syntagmatic 
dimension.  
 
hypothesis is that it follows the dominant semiological order of the twentieth 
century &mdash; that of cinema. As noted in the previous chapter, cinema replaced all 

Interactive interfaces foreground the paradigmatic dimension and often 

Why does new media insist on this language-like sequencing? My 

 

&#xC; 
205

  

248

other modes of narration with a sequential narrative, an assembly line of shots 
which appear on the screen one at a time. For centuries, a spatialized narrative 
where all images appear simultaneously dominated European visual culture; then 
it was  delegated to "minor" cultural forms as comics or technical illustrations. 
"Real" culture of the twentieth century came to speak in linear chains, aligning 
itself with the assembly line of an industrial society and the Turing machine of a 
post-industrial era. New media continues this mode, giving the user information 
one screen at a time. At least, this is the case when it tries to become "real" 
culture (interactive narratives, games); when it simply functions as an interface to 
information, it is not ashamed to present much more information on the screen at 
once, be it in the form of tables, normal or pull-down menus, or lists. In particular, 
the experience of a user filling in an on-line form can be compared to pre-
cinematic spatialized narrative: in both cases, the user is following a sequence of 
elements which are presented simultaneously.   
 
 
A Database Complex 
 
To what extent is the database form intrinsic to modern storage media? For 
instance, a typical music CD is a collection of individual tracks grouped together. 
The database impulse also drives much of photography throughout its history, 
from William Henry Fox Talbot's "Pencil of Nature" to August Sander's 
monumental typology of modern German society "Face of Our Time," to the 
Bernd and Hilla Becher's equally obsessive cataloging of water towers. Yet, the 
connection between storage media and database forms is not universal. The prime 
exception is cinema. Here the storage media supports the narrative 
imagination.
technology sustain database, while in the case of cinema it gives rise to a modern 
narrative form par excellence? Does this have to do with the method of media 
access? Shall we conclude that random access media, such as computer storage 
formats  (hard drives, removable disks, CD-ROMs), favors database, while 
sequential access media, such as film, favors narrative?  This does not hold either. 
For instance, a book, this perfect random-access medium, supports database 
forms, such as photo-albums, and narrative forms, such as novels.   
Rather than trying to correlate database and narrative forms with modern 
 
media and information technologies, or deduce them from these technologies, I 
prefer to think of them as two competing imaginations, two basic creative 
impulses, two essential responses to the world. Both have existed long before 
modern media. The ancient Greeks produced long narratives, such as Homer's 
epic poems The Iliad and The Odyssey; they also produced encyclopedias. The 
first fragments of a Greek encyclopedia to have survived were the work of 
Speusippus, a nephew of Plato. Diderot wrote novels &mdash; and also was in charge of 

 Why then, in the case of photography storage media,  does 

 

&#xC; 
206

Modern media is the new battlefield for the competition between database 

monumental Encyclop&eacute;die, the largest publishing project of the 18th century.  
Competing to make meaning out of the world, database and narrative produce 
endless hybrids. It is hard to find a pure encyclopedia without any traces of a 
narrative in it and vice versa. For instance, until alphabetical organization became 
popular a few centuries ago, most encyclopedias were organized thematically, 
with topics covered in a particular order (typically, corresponding to seven liberal 
arts.) At the same time, many narratives, such as the novels by Cervantes and 
Swift, and even Homer's epic poems &mdash; the founding narratives of the Western 
tradition &mdash; traverse an imaginary encyclopedia.  
 
and narrative. It is tempting to read the history of this competition in dramatic 
terms. First the medium of visual recording &mdash; photography &mdash; privileges 
catalogs, taxonomies and lists. While the modern novel blossoms, and 
academicians continue to produce historical narrative paintings all through the 
nineteenth century, in the realm of the new techno-image of photography, 
database rules. The next visual recording medium &mdash; film &mdash; privileges narrative. 
Almost all fictional films are narratives, with few exceptions. Magnetic tape used 
in video does not bring any substantial changes. Next storage media &mdash; computer 
controlled digital storage devices (hard drives, removable drives, CD-ROMs, 
DVD) privilege database once again. Multimedia encyclopedias, virtual 
museums, pornography, artists' CD-ROMs, library databases, Web indexes, and, 
of course, the Web itself: database is more popular than ever before. 
 
Like a virus, databases infect CD-ROMs and hard drives, servers and Web sites. 
Can we say that database is the cultural form most characteristic of a computer? 
In her 1978 article "Video: The Aesthetics of Narcissism," probably the single 
most well-known article on video art, art historian Rosalind Krauss argued that 
video is not a physical medium but a psychological one. In her analysis, "video's 
real medium is a psychological situation, the very terms of which are to withdraw 
attention from an external object &mdash; an Other &mdash;  and invest it in the Self."
 In 
short, video art is a support for the psychological condition of narcissism.
Does new media similarly function to play out a particular psychological 
condition, something which can be called a database complex? In this respect, it is 
interesting that database imagination has accompanied computer art from its very 
beginning. In the 1960s, artists working with computers wrote programs to 
systematically explore the combinations of different visual elements. In part they 
were following art world trends such as minimalism. Minimalist artists executed 
works of art according to pre-existent plans; they also created series of images or 
objects by systematically varying a single parameter. So, when minimalist artist 
Sol LeWitt spoke of an artist's idea as "the machine which makes the work," it 
251
was only logical to substitute the human executing the idea by a computer.

Digital computer turns out to be the perfect medium for the database form. 

249
250

 

At 

 

&#xC; 
207

252

 In 1967 he 

Even more remarkable were films by John Witney, the pioneer of 

the same time, since the only way to make pictures with a computer was by 
writing a computer program, the logic of computer programming itself pushed 
computer artists in the same directions. Thus, for artist Frieder Nake a computer 
was a "Universal Picture Generator," capable of producing every possible picture 
out of a combination of available picture elements and colors.
published a portfolio of 12 drawings which were obtained by successfully 
multiplying a square matrix by itself. Another early computer artist Manfred 
Mohr produced numerous images which recorded various transformations of a 
basic cube.    
 
computer filmmaking.  His films such as "Permutations" (1967), "Arabesque" 
(1975) and others systematically explored the transformations of geometric forms 
obtained by manipulating elementary mathematical functions. Thus they 
substituted successive accumulation of visual effects for narrative, figuration or 
even formal development. Instead they presented the viewer with databases of 
effects. This principle reaches its extreme in Witney's earlier film which was 
made using analog computer and was called "Catalog." In his important book on 
new forms of cinema of the 1960s entitled Expanded Cinema (1970) critic Gene 
Youngblood writes about this remarkable film:  "The elder Whitney actually 
never produced a complete, coherent movie on the analog computer because he 
was continually developing and refining the machine while using it for 
commercial work... However, Whitney did assemble a visual catalogue of the 
effects he had perfected over the years. This film, simply titled Catalog, was 
completed in 1961 and proved to be of such overwhelming beauty that many 
persons still prefer Whitney's analogue work over his digital computer films."
 
One is tempted to read "Catalog" as one of the founding moments of new media. 
As discussed in "Selection" section, today all software for media creation arrives 
with endless "plug-ins"  &mdash; the banks of effects which with a press of a button 
generate interesting images from any input whatsoever. In parallel, much of the 
aesthetics of computerised visual culture is effects driven, especially when a new 
techno-genre (computer animation, multimedia, Web sites) is just getting 
established. For instance, countless music videos are variations of Witney's 
"Catalog" &mdash; the only difference is that the effects are applied to the images of 
human performers. This is yet another example of how the logic of a computer &mdash; 
in this case, the ability of a computer to produce endless variations of elements 
and to act as a filter, transforming its input to yield a new output &mdash; becomes the 
logic of culture at large.     
 
 
Database Cinema: Greenaway and Vertov 
 

253

 

&#xC; 
208

Peter Greenaway, one of the very few prominent film directors concerned 

Although database form may be inherent to new media, countless attempts to 
create "interactive narratives" testify to our dissatisfaction with the computer in 
the sole role of an encyclopedia or a catalog of effects. We want new media 
narratives, and we want these narratives to be different from the narratives we saw 
or read before. In fact, regardless of how often we repeat in public that the 
modernist notion of medium specificity ("every medium should develop its own 
unique language") is obsolete, we do expect computer narratives to showcase new 
aesthetic possibilities which did not exist before digital computers. In short, we 
want them to be new media specific.  Given the dominance of database in 
computer software and the key role it plays in the computer-based design process, 
perhaps we can arrive at new kinds of narrative by focusing our attention on how 
narrative and database can work together. How can a narrative take into account 
the fact that its elements are organized in a database? How can our new abilities 
to store vast amounts of data, to automatically classify, index, link, search and 
instantly retrieve it lead to new kinds of narratives?  
 
with expanding cinema's language, complained that "the linear pursuit &mdash; one 
story at a time told chronologically &mdash; is the standard format of cinema." Pointing 
out that cinema lags behind modern literature in experimenting with narrative, he 
asked: "Could it not travel on the road where Joyce, Eliot, Borges and Perec have 
already arrived?"
 While Greenaway is right to direct filmmakers to more 
innovative literary narratives, new media artists working on the database &mdash; 
narrative problem can learn from cinema "as it is." For cinema already exists right 
in the intersection between database and narrative. We can think of all the 
material accumulated during shooting forming a database, especially since the 
shooting schedule usually does not follow the narrative of the film but is 
determined by production logistics. During editing the editor constructs a film 
narrative out of this database, creating a unique trajectory through the conceptual 
space of all possible films which could have been constructed. From this 
perspective, every filmmaker engages with the database-narrative problem in 
every film, although only a few have done this self-consciously.  
 
One exception is Greenaway himself. Throughout his career, he has been 
working on a problem of how to reconcile database and narrative forms. Many of 
his films progress forward by recounting a list of items, a catalog which does not 
have any inherent order (for example, different books in Prospero's Books).  
Working to undermine a linear narrative, Greenaway uses different systems to 
order his films. He wrote about this approach: "If a numerical, alphabetic color-
coding system is employed, it is done deliberately as a device, a construct, to 
counteract, dilute, augment or compliment the all-pervading obsessive cinema 
interest in plot, in narrative, in the 'I'am now going to tell you a story school of 
film-making."
 His favorite system is numbers. The sequence of numbers acts 
as a narrative shell which "convinces" the viewer that she is watching a narrative. 

254

255

 

&#xC; 
209

In reality the scenes which follow one another are not connected in any logical 
way.  By using numbers, Greenaway "wraps" a minimal narrative around a 
database. Although Greenaway's database logic was present already in his "avant-
garde" films such as The Falls (1980), it has also structured his  "commercial" 
films from the beginning. Draughtsman's Contract (1982) is centered around 
twelve drawings being made by the draftsman. They do not form any order; 
Greenaway emphasizes this by having draftsman to work on a few drawings at 
once.  Eventually, Greenaway's desire to take "cinema out of cinema" led to his 
work on a series of installations and museum exhibitions in the 1990s. No longer 
having to conform to the linear medium of film, the elements of a database are 
spatialized within a museum or even the whole city. This move can be read as the 
desire to create a database at its most pure form: the set of elements not ordered in 
any way. If the elements exist in one dimension (time of a film, list on a page), 
they will be inevitably ordered. So the only way to create a pure database is to 
spatialise it, distributing the elements in space. This is exactly the path which 
Greenaway took. Situated in three-dimensional space which does not have an 
inherent narrative logic, a 1992 installation "100 Objects to Represent the World" 
in its very title proposes that the world should be understood through a catalog 
rather than a narrative. At the same time,  Greenaway does not abandon narrative; 
he continues to investigate how database and narrative can work together. Having 
presented "100 Objects" as an installation, Greenaway next turned it into an opera 
set. In the opera, the narrator Thrope uses the objects to conduct Adam and Eve 
through the whole of human civilization, thus turning a 100 objects into a 
sequential narrative.
(1995) Greenaway put up a hundred screens &mdash; each for one year in the history of 
cinema &mdash; throughout Munich. Again, Greenaway presents us  with a spatialized 
database &mdash; but also with a narrative. By walking from one screen to another, one 
follows cinema&rsquo;s history. The project uses Greenaway's favorite principle of 
organization by numbers, pushing it to the extreme: the projections on the screens 
contain no figuration, just numbers. The screens are numbered from 1895 to 1995, 
one screen for each year of cinema's history. Along with numbers, Greenaway 
introduces another line of development. Each projection is slightly different in 
color.
 The hundred colored squares form an abstract narrative of their own 
which runs in parallel to the linear narrative of cinema&rsquo;s history. Finally, 
Greenaway superimposes yet a third narrative by dividing the history of cinema 
into five sections, each section staged in a different part of the city. The apparent 
triviality of the basic narrative of the project &mdash; one hundred numbers, standing 
for one hundred years of cinema&rsquo;s history &mdash; "neutralizes" the narrative, forcing 
the viewer to focus on the phenomenon of the projected light itself, which is the 
actual subject of this project.  
 
"database filmmaker" of the twentieth century. Man with a Movie Camera is 

Along with Greenaway, Dziga Vertov can be thought of as a major 

257

256

 In another installation "The Stairs-Munich-Projection" 

 

&#xC; 
210

Although I pointed out that film editing in general can be compared to 

perhaps the most important example of database imagination in modern media art. 
In one of the key shots repeated few times in the film we see an editing room with 
a number of shelves used to keep and organize the shot material. The shelves are 
marked "machines," "club," "the movement of a city," "physical exercise," "an 
illusionist," and so on. This is the database of the recorded material. The editor &mdash; 
Vertov's wife, Elizaveta Svilova &mdash; is shown working with this database: 
retrieving some reels, returning used reels, adding new ones.  
 
creating a trajectory through a database, in the case of Man with a Movie Camera 
this comparison constitutes the very method of the film. Its subject is the 
filmmaker's struggle to reveal (social) structure among the multitude of observed 
phenomena. Its project is a brave attempt at an empirical epistemology which 
only has one tool  &mdash; perception. The goal is to decode the world purely through 
the surfaces visible to the eye  (of course, its natural sight enhanced by a movie 
camera). This is how the film's co-author Mikhail Kaufman describes it:  
 

An ordinary person finds himself in some sort of environment, gets lost 
amidst the zillions of phenomena, and observes these phenomena from a 
bad vantage point. He registers one phenomenon very well, registers a 
second and a third, but has no idea of where they may lead... But the man 
with a movie camera is infused with the particular thought that he is 
actually seeing the world for other people. Do you understand? He joins 
these phenomena with others, from elsewhere, which may not even have 
been filmed by him. Like a kind of scholar he is able to gather empirical 
observations in one place and then in another. And that is actually the way 
in which the world has come to be understood.

258

  

 
Therefore, in contrast to standard film editing which consists in selection and 
ordering of previously shot material according to a pre-existent script, here the 
process of relating shots to each other, ordering and reordering them in order to 
discover the hidden order of the world constitutes the film's method. Man with a 
Movie Camera traverses its database in a particular order to construct an 
argument. Records drawn from a database and arranged in a particular order 
become a picture of modern life &mdash; but simultaneously an argument about this 
life, an interpretation of what these images, which we encounter every day, every 
second, actually mean.
 
quite complex, and on the first glance has little to do with a database. Just as new 
media objects contain a hierarchy of levels (interface &mdash; content; operating system 
&mdash; application; web page &mdash; HTML code; high-level programming language &mdash; 
assembly language &mdash; machine language), Vertov's film consists of at least three 
levels. One level is the story of a cameraman filming material for the film. The 

Was this brave attempt successful? The overall structure of the film is 

259

 

 

&#xC; 
211

260

 Vertov goes back and forth between the 

Of course watching Man with a Movie Camera is anything but a banal 

second level is the shots of an audience watching the finished film in a movie 
theater. The third level is this film, which consists from footage recorded in 
Moscow, Kiev and Riga and is arranged according to a progression of one day:  
waking up &mdash; work &mdash; leisure activities. If this third level is a text, the other two 
can be thought of as its meta-texts.
three levels, shifting between the text and its meta-texts: between the production 
of the film, its reception, and the film itself.  But if we focus on the film within 
the film (i.e., the level of the text)  and disregard the special effects used to create 
many of the shots, we discover almost a linear printout, so to speak, of a database: 
a number of shots showing machines, followed by a number of shots showing 
work activities, followed by different shots of leisure, and so on. The paradigm is 
projected onto syntagm. The result is a banal, mechanical catalog of subjects 
which one can expect to find in the city of the 1920s: running trams, city beach, 
movie theaters, factories...  
 
experience. Even after the 1990s during which computer-based image and video-
makers systematically exploited every avant-garde device, the original still looks 
striking. What makes its striking is not its subjects and the associations Vertov 
tries to establish between them to impose "the communist decoding of the world" 
but the most amazing catalog of the film techniques contained within it. Fades and 
superimpositions, freeze-frames, acceleration, split screens, various types of 
rhythm and intercutting, different montage techniques
  &mdash; what film scholar 
Annette Michelson called "a summation of the resources and techniques of the 
silent cinema"
of view are stringed together with such density that the film can't be simply 
labeled avant-garde. If a "normal" avant-garde film still proposes a coherent 
language different from the language of mainstream  cinema, i.e. a small set of 
techniques which are repeated, Man with a Movie Camera never arrives at 
anything like a well-defined language. Rather, it proposes an untamed, and 
apparently endless unwinding of cinematic techniques, or, to use contemporary 
language, "effects," as cinema's new way of speaking.  
 
cultural objects or a period requires the stability of paradigms and consistent 
expectations as to which elements of paradigmatic sets may appear in a given 
situation. For example, in a case of classical Hollywood style, a viewer may 
expect that a new scene will begin with an establishing shot or that a particular 
lighting convention such as high key or low key will be used throughout the film. 
(David Bordwell defines a Hollywood style in terms of paradigms which are 
ranked in terms of probabilities.263)  

Traditionally, a personal artistic language or a style common to a group of 

The endless new possibilities provided by computer software hold the 
promise of new cinematic languages, but in the same time they prevent such 

261

262

 &mdash; and of course, a multitude of unusual, "constructivist" points 

 

&#xC; 
212

languages from coming into being. (I am using the example of film but the same 
logic applies to all other areas of computer-based visual culture.) Since every 
software comes with numerous sets of transitions, 2D filters, 3D transformations 
and other effects and &#x93;&ldquo;plug-ins,&#x94;&rdquo; the artist, especially the beginner, is tempted to 
use many of them in the same work. In such a case a  paradigm becomes the 
syntagm. That is, rather than making singular choices from the sets of possible 
techniques, or, to use the term of Russian formalists, devices, and then repeating 
them throughout the work (for instance, using only cuts, or only cross-dissolves), 
the artist ends up using many options in the same work. Ultimately, a digital film 
becomes a list of different effects, which appear one after another. Witney&#x92;&rsquo;s 
Catalog is the extreme expression of this logic.  

The possibility of creating a stable new language is also subverted by the 

constant introduction of new techniques over time. Thus the new media 
paradigms not only contain many more options than in the old media but they also 
keep growing over time. And in culture ruled by the logic of fashion, i.e., the 
demand for constant innovation, the artists tend to adopt newly available options 
while simultaneously dropping the already familiar ones. Every year, every month 
new effects found their way into the media works, displacing the previously 
prominent ones and destabilizing any stable expectations which viewers could 
have begin to form. 

And this is why Vertov&rsquo;s film has a particular relevance to new media. It 

proves that it is possible to turn &ldquo;effects&rdquo; into a meaningful artistic language. Why 
in the case of Witney's computer films and music videos are the effects just 
effects, while in the hands of Vertov they acquire meaning? Because in Vertov's 
film they are motivated by a particular argument, this being that the new 
techniques to obtain images and manipulate them, summed up by Vertov in his 
term "kino-eye," can be used to decode the world. As the film progresses, 
"straight" footage gives way to manipulated footage; newer techniques appear one 
after one, reaching a roller coaster intensity by the film's end, a true orgy of 
cinematography. It is as though Vertov re-stages his discovery of the kino-eye for 
us. Along with Vertov, we gradually realize the full range of possibilities offered 
by the camera. Vertov's goal is to seduce us into his way of seeing and thinking, 
to make us share his excitement, his gradual process of discovery of film's new 
language. This process of discovery is film's main narrative and it is told through 
a catalog of discoveries being made. Thus, in the hands of Vertov, a database, this 
normally static and "objective" form, becomes dynamic and subjective. More 
importantly, Vertov is able to achieve something which new media designers and 
artists still have to learn  &mdash; how to merge database and narrative merge into a 
new  form. 

 

&#xC; 
213

 

Navigable space  

 
 
Doom and Myst   
 
Looking at the first decade of new media &mdash; the 1990s &mdash; one can point at a 
number of objects which exemplify new media&rsquo;s potential to give rise to 
genuinely original and historically unprecedented aesthetic forms. Among them, 
two stand out. Both are computer games. Both were published in the same year, 
1993. Each became a phenomenon whose popularity has extended beyond the 
hard core gaming community, spilling into sequels, books, TV, films, fashion and 
design. Together, they defined the new field and its limits. These games are Doom 
(id Software, 1993) and Myst (Cyan, 1993).  
 
In a number of ways, Doom and Myst are completely different. Doom is 
fast paced; Myst is slow. In Doom the player runs through the corridors trying to 
complete each level as soon as possible, and then moves to the next one. In Myst, 
the player is moving through the world literally one step at a time, unraveling the 
narrative along the way. Doom is populated with numerous demons lurking 
around every corner, waiting to attack; Myst is completely empty. The world of 
Doom follows the convention of computer games: it consists of a few dozen 
levels. Although Myst also contains four separate worlds, each is more like a self-
contained universe than a traditional computer game level. While the usual levels 
are quite similar to each other in structure and the look, the worlds of Myst are 
distinctly different.   

Another difference lies in the aesthetics of navigation. In Doom&rsquo;s world, 
defined by rectangular volumes, the player is moving in straight lines, abruptly 
turning at right angles to enter a new corridor. In Myst, the navigation is more 
free-form. The player, or more precisely, the visitor, is slowly exploring the 
environment: she may look around for a while, go in circles, return to the same 
place over and over, as though performing an elaborate dance.  

Finally, the two objects exemplify two different types of cultural 

economy. With Doom, id software pioneered the new economy which the critic of 
computer games J.C. Herz summarizes as follows: "It was an idea whose time has 
come. Release a free, stripped-down version through shareware channels, the 
Internet, and online services. Follow with a spruced-up, registered retail version 
of the software." 15 million copies of the original Doom game were downloaded 
around the world.
 By releasing detailed descriptions of game files formats and 
a game editor, id software also encouraged the players to expand the game, 
creating new levels. Thus, hacking and adding to the game became its essential 
part, with new levels widely available on the Internet for anybody to download. 
Here was a new cultural economy which transcended the usual relationship 

264

 

&#xC; 
214

Despite all these differences in cosmogony, gameplay, and the underlying 

between producers and consumers or between &ldquo;strategies&rdquo; and &ldquo;tactics&rdquo; (de 
Certeau): the producers define the basic structure of an object, and release few 
examples and  the tools to allow the consumers to build their own versions, shared 
with other consumers. In contrast, the creators of Myst  followed an older model 
of cultural economy. Thus, Myst is more similar to a traditional artwork than to a 
piece of software: something to behold and admire, rather than to take apart and 
modify. To use the terms of the software industry, it is a closed, or proprietary 
system, something which only the original creators can modify or add to.   
 
economic model, the two games are similar in one key respect. Both are spatial 
journeys. The navigation though 3D space is an essential, if not the key 
component, of the gameplay. Doom and Myst  present the user with a space to be 
traversed, to be mapped out by moving through it. Both begin by dropping the 
player somewhere in this space. Before reaching the end of the game narrative, 
the player must visit most of it, uncovering its geometry and topology, learning it 
logic and its secrets. In Doom and Myst &mdash; and in a great many other computer 
games  &mdash; narrative and time itself are equated with the movement through 3D 
space, the progression through rooms, levels, or words. In contrast to modern 
literature, theater, and cinema which are built around the psychological tensions 
between the characters and the movement in psychological space, these computer 
games return us to the ancient forms of narrative where the plot is driven by the 
spatial movement of the main hero, traveling through distant lands to save the 
princess, to find the treasure, to defeat the Dragon, and so on. As J.C. Herz writes 
about the experience of playing a classical text-based adventure game Zork, "you 
gradually unlocked a world in which the story took place, and the receeding edge 
of this world carried you through to the story's conclusion."
 Stripping away the 
representation of inner life, psychology and other modernist nineteenth century 
inventions, these are the narratives in the original Ancient Greek sense, for, as 
Michel de Certau reminds us, "In Greek, narration is called 'diagesis': it 
establishes an itinerary (it 'guides) and it passes through (it 'transgresses").
 
In the introduction to this chapter I invoked the opposition between 
narration and dsecription from narratology. As stated by Mieke Bal, the standard 
theoretical premise of narratology was that &ldquo;descriptions interrupt the line of 
fabula.&rdquo;
as absence of narration, was always problematic. It automatically privileged 
certain types of narrative (myths, fairy tales, detective stories, classical 
Hollywood cinema), while making it difficult to think about other forms where 
actions of characters do not dominate the narrative (for instance, films by Andrey 
268
Tarkovskiy and Hirokazu Kore-eda, the director of Maborosi and After Life).
 
Games structured around first-person navigation through space further challenge 
narration-description opposition.  

 For me this opposition, in which description was defined negatively, 

267

265

266

  

 

&#xC; 
215

Instead of narration and description, we may be better off thinking about 

games in terms of narrative actions and exploration. Rather than being narrated to, 
the player herself has to perform actions to move narrative forward: talking to 
other characters she encounters in the game world, picking up objects, fighting the 
enemies, and so on. If the player does not do anything, the narrative stops. From 
this perspective, movement through the game world is one of the main narrative 
actions. But this movement also serves a self-sufficient goal of exploration. 
Exploring the game world, examining its details and enjoying its images is as 
important for the success of games such as Myst and its followers, as progressing 
through the narrative. Thus while from one point of view game narratives can be 
aligned with ancient narratives which also were structured around movement 
through space, from another perspective they are the exact opposite. The 
movement through space allows the player to progress through the narrative; but 
it is also valuable in itself. It is a way for the player to explore the environment.   

Narratology&rsquo;s analysis of description can be a useful start in thinking 

about exploration of space in computer game and other new media objects. Bal 
states that descriptive passages in fiction are motivated by speaking, looking and 
acting. Motivation by looking works as follows: &ldquo;A character sees an object. The 
description of reproduction of what it sees.&rdquo; Motivation by acting means that 
&ldquo;The actor carries out an action with an object. The description is then made fully 
narrative. The example of this is the scene in Zola&rsquo;s La B&ecirc;te in which Jacques 
269
  
polishes [strokes] every individual component of his beloved locomotive.&rdquo;

The central role of navigation through space, both as a tool of narration 

In contrast to modern novel, action oriented games do not have that much 
dialog, but looking and acting are indeed the key activities performed by a player. 
And if in modern fiction looking and acting are usually separate activities, in 
games they more often than note occur together. As the player comes across a 
door leading to another level, a new passage, ammunition for his machine gun, an 
enemy, or a &ldquo;health potion&rdquo; he immediately acts on these objects: opens a door, 
picks up ammunition or &ldquo;health potion,&rdquo; fires at the enemy. Thus narrative action 
and exploration are closely linked together.   
 
and of exploration, is acknowledged by the games&rsquo; designers themselves. Robyn 
Miller, one of the two co-designers of Myst pointed out that "We' are creating 
environments to just wonder around inside of. People have been calling it a game 
for lack of anything better, and we've called it a game at times. But that's not what 
it really is; it's a world."
Ultima series, contrasts game design and fiction writing: "A lot of them [fiction 
writers] develop their individual characters in detail, and they say what is their 
problem in the beginning, and what they are going to grow to learn in the end. 
That's not the method I've used... I have the world. I have the message. And then 
the characters are there to support the world and the message."

 Richard Garriott, the designer of classical RPG 

271

 

270

 

&#xC; 
216

Structuring the game as a navigation through space is common to games 

 
across all the game genres. This includes adventure games (for instance, Zork, 7th 
Level, The Journeyman Project, Tomb Raider, Myst), strategy games (Command 
and Conquer) role-playing games (Diablo, Final Fantasy), flying, driving, and 
other simulators (Microsoft Flight Simulator), action games (Hexen, Mario), and, 
of course, first person shooters which have followed in Doom&rsquo;s steps (Quake, 
Unreal). These genres follow different conventions. In adventure games, the user 
is exploring an universe, gathering resources. In strategy games, the user is 
engaged in allocating and moving resources and in risk management. In RPGs 
(role playing games), the user is building a character, acquiring the skills; the 
narrative is one of self-improvement. The genre conventions by themselves do not 
make it necessary for these games to employ a navigable space interface. 
Therefore, the fact that they all consistently do use it suggests to me that 
navigable space represents a larger cultural form. In other words, it is something 
which transcends computer games, and in fact, as we will see later, computer 
culture as well. Just like a database, navigable space is a form which already 
exists before computers; however, the computer becomes its perfect medium.   
 
Indeed, the use of navigable space is common to all areas of new media. 
During the 1980s, numerous 3D computer animations were organized around a 
single, uninterrupted camera move through a complex and extensive set. In a 
typical animation, a camera would fly over mountain terrain, or move through a 
series of rooms, or maneuver past geometric shapes. In contrast to both ancient 
myths and computer games, this journey had no goal, no purpose. In short, there 
was no narrative. Here was the ultimate "road movie" where the navigation 
through the space was sufficient in itself.    
 
of 
 post-computer cinema and location-based entertainment &mdash; the motion 
simulator.
 By using the first person point of view and by synchronizing the 
movement of the platform housing the audience with the movement of a virtual 
camera, motion simulators recreate the experience of traveling in a vehicle. 
Thinking about the historical precedents of a motion simulator, we begin to 
uncover some places where the form of navigable space already manifested itself. 
They include Hale's Tours and Scenes of the World ,  a popular film-based 
attraction which debuted at the St. Louis Fare in 1904; roller-coaster rides; flight, 
vehicle and military simulators, which used a moving base since the early 1930s; 
and the fly-through sequences in 2001: A Space Odyssey  (Kubrick, 1968) and 
Star Wars  (Lucas, 1977). Among these, A Space Odyssey plays particularly 
important role; Douglas Trumbull, who since the late 1980s produced some of the 
most well-known motion simulator attractions and was the key person behind the 
rise of the whole motion simulator phenomenon begun his career by creating ride 
sequences for this film. 

In the 1990s, these 3D fly-throughs have come to constitute the new genre 

272

 

&#xC; 
217

Along with providing a key foundation for new media aesthetics, 

 
navigable space also became a new tool of labor. It is now a common way to 
visualize and work with any data. From scientific visualization to walk-throughs 
of architectural designs, from models of a stock market performance to statistical 
datasets, the 3D virtual space combined with a camera model is the accepted way 
to visualize all information (see the section "The Language of Cultural 
Interfaces"). It is as accepted in computer culture as charts and graphs were in a 
print culture.

273

 

Since navigable space can be used to represent both physical spaces and 

275

276 

The original (i.e. the 1980&rsquo;s) vision of cyberspace called for a 3D space of 

abstract information spaces, it is only logical that it also emerged as an important 
paradigm in human-computer interfaces. Indeed, on one level HCI can be seen as 
a particular case of data visualization, the data being computer files rather than 
molecules, architectural models or stock market figures. The examples of 3D 
navigable space interfaces are the Information Visualizer (Xerox Parc) which 
 274
replaces a flat desktop with 3D rooms and planes rendered in perspective;
 
T_Vision (ART+COM) which uses a navigable 3D representation of the earth as 
its interface;
 and The Information Landscape (Silicon Graphics) in which the 
user flies over a plane populated by data objects.
 
information to be traversed by a human user, or, to use the term of William 
Gibson, a "data cowboy."
 Even before Gibson's fictional descriptions of 
cyberspace were published, cyberspace was visualized in the film Tron (Disney, 
1982). Although Tron takes place inside a single computer rather than a network, 
its vision of users zapping through the immaterial space defined by lines of light 
is remarkably similar to the one articulated by Gibson in his novels. In an article 
which appeared in the 1991 anthology Cyberspace: First Steps  Marcos Novak 
still defined cyberspace as "a completely spatialized visualization of all 
information in global information processing systems."
1990s, this vision has survived among the original designers of VRML (The 
Virtual Reality Modeling Language). In designing the language, they aimed to 
"create a unified conceptualization of space spanning the entire Internet, a spatial 
equivalent of WWW."
 They saw VRML as a natural stage in the evolution of 
the Net from an abstract data network toward a "'perceptualized' Internet where 
the data has been sensualized," i.e., represented in three dimensions.
 
The term cyberspace itself is derived from another term&mdash; cybernetics. In 
his 1947 book Cybernetics mathematician Norbert Wiener has defined it as "the 
science of control and communications in the animal and machine." Wiener 
conceived of cybernetics during World War II when he was working on problems 
concerning gunfire control and automatic missile guidance. He derived the term 
cybernetics from the ancient Greek word kybernetikos  which refers to the art of 

 In the first part of the 

280

   

278

277

279

 

&#xC; 
218

281

From one point of view, navigable space can be legitimately seen as a 

the steersman and can be translated as &ldquo;good at steering.&rdquo; Thus, the idea of 
navigable space lies at the very origins of computer era. The steersman navigating 
the ship and the missile traversing space on its way to the target have given rise to 
a whole number of new figures: the heroes of William Gibson, the &ldquo;data 
cowboys&rdquo; moving through the vast terrains of cyberspace; the "driver" of a 
motion simulator; a computer user, navigating through the scientific data sets and 
computer data structures, molecules and genes, earth's atmosphere and the human 
body; and last but not least, the player of  Doom, Myst and their endless 
imitations.  
  
particular kind of an interface to a database, and thus something which does not 
deserve a special focus. I would like, however, to also think of it as a cultural 
form of its own, not only because of its prominence across the new media 
landscape and, as we will see later, its persistence in new media history, but also 
because, more so than a database, it is a new form which may be unique to new 
media. Of course both the organization of space and its use to represent or 
visualize something else have always been a fundamental part of human culture. 
Architecture and ancient mnemonics, city planing and diagramming, geometry 
and topology are just some of the disciples and techniques which were developed 
to harness space's symbolic and economic capital.
 Spatial constructions in new 
media draw on all these existing traditions &mdash; but they are also fundamentally 
different in one key respect. For the first time, space becomes a media type. Just 
as other media types &mdash; audio, video, stills, and text &mdash; it can be now instantly 
transmitted, stored and retrieved, compressed, reformatted, streamed, filtered, 
computed, programmed and interacted with. In other words, all operations which 
are possible with media as a result of its conversion to computer data can also 
now apply to representations of 3D space.     
 
space. The examples are Henri Lefebvre's work on the politics and anthropology 
of everyday space;  Michel Foucault's analysis of the Panopticon's topology as a 
model of modern subjectivity; the writings of Frederick Jameson and David 
Harvey on the post-modern space of global capitalism; Edward Soja&rsquo;s work on 
political geography.
practitioners have come with many formulations of how cyberspace should be 
structured and how computer-based spatial representations can be used in new 
ways.
 What received little attention, however, both in cultural theory and in 
new media theory, is a particular category of navigation through space. And yet, 
this category characterizes new media as it actually exists; in other words, new 
media spaces are always spaces of navigation. At the same time, as we will see 
later in this section, this category also fits a number of developments in other 
cultural fields such as anthropology and architecture.   

Recent cultural theory has paid increasing attention to the category of 

282

 At the same time, new media theoreticians and 

283

 

&#xC; 
219

  
To summarize, along with a database, navigable space is another key form 
of new media. It is already an accepted way for interacting with any type of data; 
an interface of computer games and motion simulators and, potentially, of any 
computer in general. Why does computer culture spatialize all representations and 
experiences (the library is replaced by cyberspace; narrative is equated with 
traveling through space; all kinds of data are rendered in three dimensions through 
computer visualization)? Shall we try to oppose this spatialization (i.e., what 
about time in new media?) And, finally, what are the aesthetics of navigation 
through virtual space? 
 
 
Computer Space 
 
The very first coin-op arcade game was called Computer Space. The game 
simulated the dogfight between a spaceship and a flying saucer. Released in 1971,  
it was a remake of the first computer game Spacewar programmed on PDP-1 at 
MIT in 1962.
 Both of these legendary games included the word space in their 
titles; and appropriately, space was one of the main characters in each of them.  In 
the original Spacewar the player was navigating two spaceships around the screen 
while shooting torpedoes at one another. The player also had to be careful in 
maneuvering the ships to make sure they would not get too close to the star in the 
center of the screen which pulled them towards it. Thus, along with the 
spaceships, the player also had to interact with space itself. And although, in 
contrast to such films as 2001, Star Wars,  or Tron, the space of Spacewar and 
Computer Space was not navigable &mdash; one could not move through it &mdash; the 
simulation of gravity made it truly an active presence. Just as the player had to 
engage with the spaceships, he had to engage with the space itself. 

284

To explore this thesis further we can borrow the categories developed by 

This active treatment of space is an exception rather than the rule in new 
media. Although new media objects favor the use of space for representations of 
all kinds, most often virtual spaces are not true spaces but collections of separate 
objects. Or, to put this in a slogan: there is no space in cyberspace.  
 
art historians early in this century. Alois Riegl, Heinrich W&ouml;lfflin, and Erwin 
Panofsky, the founders of modern art history, defined their field as the history of 
the representation of space. Working within the paradigm of cyclic cultural 
development, they related the representation of space in art to the spirit of entire 
epochs, civilizations, and races. In his 1901 Die Sp&auml;tr&ouml;mische Kunstindustrie 
(&ldquo;The late-Roman art industry&rdquo;), Riegl characterized mankind&rsquo;s cultural 
development as the oscillation between two ways of understanding space, which 
he called haptic and optic. Haptic perception isolates the object in the field as a 
discrete entity, while optic perception unifies objects in a spatial continuum. 
Riegl&rsquo;s contemporary, Heinrich W&ouml;lfflin, similarly proposed that the 

 

&#xC; 
220

285 

286 

Panofsky established a parallel between the history of spatial 

temperament of a period or a nation expresses itself in a particular mode of seeing 
and representing space. W&ouml;lfflin&rsquo;s Principles of Art History (1913) plotted the 
differences between Renaissance and baroque styles along five axes: 
linear/painterly; plane/recession; closed form/open form; multiplicity/unity; and 
clearness/unclearness.
Erwin Panofsky, another founder of modern art history, 
contrasted the &ldquo;aggregate&rdquo; space of the Greeks with the &ldquo;systematic&rdquo; space of the 
Italian Renaissance in his famous essay Perspective as Symbolic Form (1924-
25).
representation and the evolution of abstract thought. The former moves from the 
space of individual objects in antiquity, to the representation of space as 
continuous and systematic in modernity. Correspondingly, the evolution of 
abstract thought progresses from ancient philosophy&rsquo;s view of the physical 
universe as discontinuous and &ldquo;aggregate&rdquo;, to the post-Renaissance understanding 
of space as infinite, homogeneous, isotropic, and with ontological primacy in 
relation to objects &mdash; in short, as systematic. 
We don&rsquo;t have to believe in grand evolutionary schemes in order to 
 
usefully retain such categories.  What kind of space is virtual space? At first 
glance the technology of 3D computer graphics exemplifies Panofsky&rsquo;s concept 
of systematic space, which exists prior to the objects in it. Indeed, the Cartesian 
coordinate system is built into computer graphics software and often into the 
hardware itself.
presented with an empty space defined by a perspectival grid; the space will be 
gradually filled by the objects created. If the built-in message of a music 
synthesizer is a sine wave, the built-in world of computer graphics is an empty 
Renaissance space: the coordinate system itself. 
 
aggregate than optic and systematic. The most commonly used computer-graphics 
technique of creating 3D worlds is polygonal modeling. The virtual world created 
with this technique is a vacuum containing separate objects defined by rigid 
boundaries. What is missing from computer space is space in the sense of 
medium: the environment in which objects are embedded and the effect of these 
objects on each other. This is what Russian writers and artists call 
prostranstvennaya sreda. Pavel Florensky, a legendary Russian philosopher and 
art historian has described it in the following way in the early 1920s: &ldquo;The space-
medium is objects mapped onto space... We have seen the inseparability of 
Things and space, and the impossibility of representing Things and space by 
 This understanding of space also characterizes a particular 
themselves.&rdquo;
tradition of modern painting which stretches from Seurat to Giacommetti and De 
Kooning. These painters tried to eliminate the notions of a distinct object and an 
empty space as such. Instead they depicted a dense field that occasionally hardens 
into something which we can read as an object. Following the example of Gilles 

Yet computer-generated worlds are actually much more haptic and 

287

 A designer launching a modeling program is typically 

288

 

&#xC; 
221

289

Deleuze&rsquo;s analysis of cinema as activity of articulating new concepts, akin to 
philosophy,
 it can be said that modern painters which belong to this tradition 
worked to articulate the particular philosophical concept in their painting &mdash; that 
of space-medium. This concept is something mainstream computer graphics still 
has to discover.  
 
Another basic technique used in creating virtual worlds also leads to  
aggregate space. It involves superimposing animated characters, still images, 
digital movies, and other elements over a separate background. Traditionally this 
technique was used in video and computer games. Responding to the limitations 
of the available computers, the designers of early games would limit animation to 
a small part of a screen. 2D animated objects and characters called sprites were 
drawn over a static background. For example, in Space Invaders the abstract 
shapes representing the invaders would fly over a blank background, while in 
Pong the tiny character moved across the picture of a maze. The sprites were 
essentially animated 2D cutouts thrown over the background image at game time, 
so no real interaction between them and the background took place. In the second 
half of the 1990s much faster processors and 3D graphics cards made it possible 
for games to switch to real-time 3D rendering. This allowed for modeling of 
visual interactions between the objects and the space they are in, such as 
reflections and shadows. Consequently, the game space became more of a 
coherent, true 3D space, rather than a set of 2D planes unrelated to each other. 
However, the limitations of earlier decades returned in another area of new media 
&mdash; online virtual worlds. Because of the limited bandwidth of the 1990s Internet, 
virtual world designers have to deal with constraints similar to and sometimes 
even more severe than the games designers two decades earlier. In online virtual 
worlds, a typical scenario may involve an avatar &mdash; a 2D or 3D graphic 
representing the user &mdash; animated in real time in response to the user&rsquo;s 
commands. The avatar is superimposed on a picture of a room, in the same way as 
in video games the sprites were superimposed over the background. The avatar is 
controlled by the user; the picture of the room is provided by a virtual-world 
operator. Because the elements come from different sources and are put together 
in real time, the result is a series of 2D planes rather than a real 3D environment. 
Although the image depicts characters in a 3D space, it is an illusion since the 
background and the characters do not &ldquo;know&rdquo; about each other, and no interaction 
between them is possible.  
 
sprites over the background to traditional cell  animation. In order to save labor, 
animators similarly divide the image between a static background and animated 
characters. In fact the sprites of computer games can be thought of as reincarnated 
animation characters. Yet the use of this technique did not prevent Fleischer and 
Disney animators from thinking of space as space-medium (to use Floresky's 
term), although they created this space-medium in a different way than the 

Historically, we can connect the technique of superimposing animated 

 

&#xC; 
222

290

 

In summary, although 3D computer-generated virtual worlds are usually 

modern painters. (Thus while the masses run away from the serious and 
&ldquo;difficult&rdquo; abstract art to enjoy the funny and figurative images of cartoons, what 
they saw was not that different from Giacommetti&rsquo;s and De Kooning&rsquo;s canvases.) 
Although all objects in cartoons have hard edges, the total anthropomorphism of 
the cartoon universe breaks the distinctions both between subjects and objects and 
objects and space. Everything is subjected to the same laws of stretch and squash, 
everything moves and twists in the same way, everything is alive to the same 
extent. It is as though everything &mdash;  the character&rsquo;s body, chairs, walls, plates, 
food, cars and so on &mdash; is made from the same bio-material. This monism of the 
cartoon worlds stands in opposition to the binary ontology of computer worlds  in 
which the space and the sprites &#xF8E7; characters appear to be made from two 
fundamentally different substances. 
 
rendered in linear perspective, they are really collections of separate objects, 
unrelated to each other. In view of this, the common argument that 3D computer 
simulations return us to Renaissance perspective and therefore, from the 
viewpoint of twentieth-century abstraction, should be considered regressive, turns 
out to be ungrounded. If we are to apply the evolutionary paradigm of Panofsky to 
the history of virtual computer space, we must conclude that it has not reached its 
Renaissance stage yet. It is  still at the level of ancient Greece, which could not 
conceive of space as a totality. 
 
Computer space is also aggregate yet in another sense. As I already noted 
using the example of Doom, traditionally the world of a computer game is not a 
continuous space but a set of discrete levels. In addition, each level is also discrete 
&mdash; it is a sum of rooms, corridors, and arenas built by the designers. Thus, rather 
conceiving space as a totality, one is dealing with a set of separate places. The 
convention of levels is remarkably stable, persisting across genres and numerous 
computer platforms.  
 
not moving any closer toward systematic space; instead, we are embracing 
aggregate space as a new norm, both metaphorically and literally. The space of 
the Web in principle can&rsquo;t be thought of as a coherent totality: it is a collection of 
numerous files, hyperlinked but without any overall perspective to unite them. 
The same holds for actual 3D spaces on the Internet. A 3D scene as defined by a 
VRML file is a list of separate objects that may exist anywhere on the Internet, 
each created by a different person or a different program. A user can easily add or 
delete objects without taking into account the overall structure of the scene.
Just as, in the case of a database, the narrative is replaced by a list of items, here a 
coherent 3D scene becomes a list of separate objects. 
 
compared to the American Wild West. The spatialized Web envisioned by VRML 
(itself a product of California) reflects the treatment of space in American culture 

With its metaphors of navigation and home steading, The Web has been 

If the World Wide Web and original VRML are any indications, we are 

 

 

&#xC; 
223

291

) However, it is important that the ontology of 

292

If art historians, literary and film scholars have traditionally analyzed the 

generally, in its lack of attention to any zone not functionally used. The marginal 
areas that exist between privately owned houses, businesses and parks are left to 
decay. The VRML universe, as defined by software standards and the default 
settings of software tools, pushes this tendency to the limit: it does not contain 
space as such but only objects that belong to different individuals. Obviously, the 
users can modify the default settings and use the tools to create the opposite of 
what the default values suggest. In fact, the actual muti-user spaces built on the 
Web can be seen precisely as the reaction against the anti-communal and discrete 
nature of American society, the attempt to substitute for the much discussed 
disappearance of traditional community by creating virtual ones. (Of course, if we 
are to follow the nineteenth century sociologist Ferdinand T&ouml;nnies, the shift from 
traditional close-knit scale community to modern impersonal society already took 
place in the nineteenth century and is an inevitable side-effect as well as a 
prerequisite for modernization.
virtual space as defined by software itself is fundamentally aggregate, a set of 
objects without a unifying point of view.  
 
structure of cultural objects as reflecting larger cultural patterns (for instance, 
Panofsky's reading of perspective), in the case of new media we should look not 
only at the finished objects but first of all at the software tools, their organization 
and default settings.
relation between the production tools and the products is one of continuity; in 
fact, it is often hard to establish the boundary between them. Thus, we may 
connect the American ideology of democracy with its paranoid fear of hierarchy 
and centralized control with the flat structure of the Web, where every page exists 
on the same level of importance as any other and where any two sources 
connected through hyperlinking have equal weight. Similarly, in the case of 
virtual 3D spaces on the Web, the lack of a unifying perspective in U.S. culture, 
whether in the space of an American city, or in the space of an increasingly 
fragmented public discourse, can be correlated with the design of VRML, which 
substitutes a collection of objects for a unified space.  
 
 
The Poetics of Navigation 
 
In order to analyze the computer representations of 3D space, I have used theories 
from early art history; but it would not be hard to find other theories which can 
work as well. However, navigation through space is a different matter. While art 
history, geography, anthropology, sociology and other disciplines have came up 
with many approaches to analyze space as a static, objectively existing structure, 
we don&rsquo;t have the same wealth of concepts to help us think about the poetics of 
navigation through space. And yet, if I am right to claim that the key feature of 

 This is particularly important because in new media the 

 

&#xC; 
224

294

293

 Yet its realism also opened a new set of aesthetic possibilities 

As a way to begin, we may take a look at some of the classical navigable 

computer space is that it is navigable, we need to be able to address this feature 
theoretically.    
 
computer spaces. The 1978 project Aspen Movie Map, designed at the MIT 
Architecture Machine Group, headed by Nicholas Negroponte (which later 
expanded into MIT Media Laboratory) is acknowledged as the first publicly 
shown interactive virtual navigable space, and also as the first hypermedia 
program. The program allowed the user to "drive" through the city of Aspen, 
Colorado. At each intersection the user was able to select a new direction using a 
joystick. To construct this program, the MIT team drove through Aspen in a car 
taking pictures every three meters. The pictures were then stored on a set of 
videodiscs. Responding to the information from the joystick, the appropriate 
picture or sequence of pictures was displayed on the screen. Inspired by a mockup 
of an airport used by the Israeli commandos to train for the Entebbe hostage-
freeing raid of 1973,Aspen Movie Map was a simulator and therefore its 
navigation modeled the real-life experience of moving in a car, with all its 
limitations.
which, unfortunately, later designers of navigable spaces did not explore further. 
All of them relied on interactive 3D computer graphics to construct their spaces. 
In contrast, Aspen Movie Map  utilized a set of photographic images; in addition, 
because the images were taken every three meters, this resulted in an interesting 
sampling of three dimensional space. Although in the 1990s Apple&rsquo;s QuickTime 
VR technology made this technique itself quite accessible, the idea of 
constructing a large-scale virtual space from photographs or a video of a real 
space was never tried out systematically again, although it opens up unique 
aesthetic possibilities not available with 3D computer graphics. 
 
influential computer navigable space, is also based on the exiting city.
 As in 
Aspen Movie Map, the navigation also simulates a real physical situation, in this 
case driving a bicycle. Its virtual space, however, is not tied to the simulation of 
physical reality: it is an imaginary city made from 3D letters. In contrast to most 
navigable spaces whose parameters are chosen arbitrarily, in Legible City 
(Amsterdam and Karlsruhe versions) every value of its virtual space is derived 
from the actual existing physical space it replaces. Each 3D letter in the virtual 
city corresponds to an actual building in a physical city; the letter&rsquo;s proportions, 
color and location are derived from the building it replaces. By navigating 
through the space, the user reads the texts composed by the letters; these texts are 
drawn from the archive documents describing the city history. Through this 
mapping Jeffrew Shaw foregrounds, or, more precisely, &ldquo;stages,&rdquo; one of the 
fundamental problematics of new media and the computer age as a whole: the 
relation between the virtual and the real. In his other works Shaw systematically 
&ldquo;staged&rdquo; other key aspects of new media such as the interactive relation between 

Jeffrew Shaw's Legible City (1988-1991), another well-known and 

 

&#xC; 
225

the viewer and the image, or the discrete quality of all computer-based 
representations. In the case of Legible City, it functions not only as a unique 
navigable virtual space of its own, but also as a comment on all the other 
navigable spaces. It suggests that instead of creating virtual spaces which have 
nothing to do with actual physical spaces, or the spaces which are closely 
modeled after existing physical structures, such as towns or shopping malls, (this 
holds for most commercial virtual worlds and VR works), we may take a middle 
road. In Legible City, the memory of the real city is carefully preserved without 
succumbing to illusionism; the virtual representation encodes the city&rsquo;s genetic 
code, its deep structure rather than its surface. Through this mapping Shaw 
proposes an ethics of the virtual. Shaw suggests that the virtual can at least 
preserve the memory of the real it replaces, encoding its structure, if not aura, in a 
new form.  

295

While Legible City was a landmark work in that it presented a symbolic 
rather than illusionistic space, its visual appearance in many ways reflected the 
default real-time graphics capability of SGI workstations on which it was running: 
flat-shaded shapes attenuated by a fog. Char Davies and her development team at 
SoftImage have consciously addressed the goal of creating a different, more 
painterly aesthetic for the navigable space in their interactive VR installation 
Osmose (1994-1995).
 From the point of view of history of modern art the 
result hardly represented an advancement. Osmose simply replaced  the usual 
hard-edge polygonal C&eacute;zanne-like look of 3D computer graphics look with a 
softer, more atmospheric, Renoir or late Monet-like environment made of 
translucent textures and flowing particles. Yet in the context of other 3D virtual 
worlds it was an important advance. The &ldquo;soft&rdquo; aesthetic of Osmose is further 
supported through the use of slow cinematic dissolves between its dozen or so 
worlds. Like in Aspen Movie Map  and in Legible City, the navigation in Osmose 
is modeled on a real-life experience, in this case, of scuba diving. The 
"immersant&rdquo; is controlling navigation by breathing: breathing in sends the body 
upward, while breathing out makes it fall. The resulting experience, according to 
the designers, is one of floating, rather than flying or driving, typical of virtual 
worlds. Another important aspect of Osmose's navigation is its collective 
character. While only one person can be "immersed" at a time, the audience can 
witness her or his journey through the virtual worlds as it unfolds on a large 
projection screen. At the same size, another translucent screen enables the 
audience to observe the body gestures of the &ldquo;immersant&rdquo; as a shadow-silhouette. 
The "immersant" thus becomes a kind of ship captain, taking the audience along 
on a journey; like the captain, she occupies a visible and symbolically marked 
position, being responsible for the audience's aesthetic experience. 
 
typical enslavement to the simulation of humanly possible navigation, be it 
walking, driving a car, pedaling a bicycle or scuba diving. In The Forest  the 

Tam&aacute;s Waliczky&rsquo;s The Forest (1993) liberated the virtual camera from its 

 

&#xC; 
226

camera slides through the endless black and white forest in a series of complex 
and melancholic moves. If modern visual culture exemplified by MTV can be 
thought of as a Mannerist stage of cinema, its perfected techniques of 
cinematography, mise-en-scene and editing self-consciously displayed and 
paraded for its own sake, Waliczky's film presents an alternative response to 
cinema&rsquo;s classical age, which is now behind us. In this meta-film, the camera, part 
of cinema&rsquo;s apparatus, becomes the main character (in this we may connect The 
Forest  to another meta-film, A Man with a Movie Camera). On first glance, the 
logic of camera movements can be identified as the quest of a human being trying 
to escape from the forest (which, in reality, is just a single picture of a tree 
repeated over and over). Yet, just as in some of the Brothers Quay animated films 
such as The Street of Crocodiles, the virtual camera of The Forest neither 
simulates natural perception nor does it follow the standard grammar of cinema&rsquo;s 
camera; instead, it establishes a distinct system of its own. In The Street of 
Crocodiles the camera suddenly takes off, rapidly moving in a straight line 
parallel to an image plane, as though mounted on some robotic arm, and just as 
suddenly stops to frame a new corner of the space. The logic of these movements 
is clearly non-human; this is the vision of some aliean creature. In contrast, in The 
Forest  the camera never stops at all, the whole film being one uninterrupted 
camera trajectory. The camera system of  The Forest  can be read as a comment 
on a fundamentally ambiguous nature of computer space. On the one hand, not 
indexically tied up to physical reality or human body, computer space is isotropic. 
In contrast to human space, in which the verticality of the body and the direction 
of the horizon are two dominant directions, computer space does not privilege any 
particular axis. In this way it is similar to the space of El Lissitzky's Prouns  and 
Kazimir Malevich's suprematist compositions &mdash; an abstract cosmos, 
unencumbered by either Earth&rsquo;s gravity or the weight of a human body. (Thus the 
game Spacewar with its simulated gravity got it wrong!) William Gibson&rsquo;s term 
&ldquo;matrix&rsquo; which he used in his novels to refer to cyberspace, captures well this 
isotropic quality. But, on the other hand, computer space is also a space of a 
human dweller, something which is used and traversed by a user, who brings her 
own anthropological framework of horizontality and verticality. The camera 
system of The Forest  foregrounds this double character of computer space. While 
no human figures or avatars appear in the film and we never get to see either the 
ground or the sky, it is centered around the stand-in for the human subject &mdash; a 
tree. The constant movements of the camera along the vertical dimension 
throughout the film &mdash; sometimes getting closer to where we imagine the ground 
plane is located, sometimes moving towards (but again, never actually showing) 
the sky &mdash; can be interpreted as an attempt to negotiate between isotropic space 
and the space of human anthropology, with its horizontality of the ground plane 
and the horizontal and vertical dimension of human bodies. The navigable space 
of The Forest thus mediates between human subjectivity and the very different 
and ultimately alien logic of a computer &mdash; the ultimate and omnipresent Other of 

 

&#xC; 
227

While the works discussed so far all created virtual navigable spaces, 

our age. 
 
George&rsquo;s Legrady interactive computer installation Transitional Spaces (1999) 
moves back from virtual into physical. Legrady locates already existing 
architectural navigable space (Siemens headquarters building in Munich) and 
makes it into an &ldquo;engine&rdquo; which triggers three cinematic projections. As regular 
office stuff and vistors move through the main entrance section and second level 
exit/entrance passage ways, their motions are picked up cameras and are used to 
control the projections. Legrady writes in his installation proposal:  
 

As the speed, location, timing, and number of individuals in the space 
control the sequence and timing of pojection sequences, the audience will 
have the opportunity to &ldquo;play&rdquo; the system, that is, engage consciously by 
interacting with the camera sensing to conrol the narrative flow of the 
installation. 

All three projections will comment on the notion of &ldquo;transitional 

space&rdquo; and narrative development. Images sequences will represent 
transitional states: from noise covered to clear, from empty to full, from 
open to close, from dark to light, from out of focus to in-focus.

296

 

 
  
Legrady&rsquo;s installtion  begins to explore one element in the &ldquo;vocabulary&rdquo; of 
navigable space &ldquo;althabet&rdquo;: transition from one state to another. (Other potential 
elements, or rather dimensions, include the character of a trajectory; the pattern of 
user&rsquo;s movement &mdash; for instance, rapid geometric momevement in Doom versus 
wondering in Myst &mdash; the possible interactions between user and the space, such 
as the character acting as a center of perspective in Waliczky&rsquo;s The Garden 
(1992); and, of course, the architecture of space itself). While the definition of 
narrative by Mieke Bal which I invoked earlier may be too restrictive in relation 
to new media, Legrady quotes another, much broader defintion by literary theorist 
Tzvetan Todorov. According to him minimal narrative involves the passage from 
&ldquo;one equilibium to another&rdquo; (or, in diffirent words, from one state to another.) 
Legrady&rsquo;s installation suggests that we can think of subject&rsquo;s movement from one 
&ldquo;stable&rdquo; point in space to another (for insance, moving from an lobby to a 
building to an office) like a narrative; by analogy, we may also think of a 
transition from on state of a new media object to another (for instance, from a 
noisy image to a noise-free image) as a minimal narrative. For me, the second 
equisation is more problematic than the first, because, in contrast to literara 
narrative, it is hard to say what constitues a &ldquo;state of equilibrium&rdquo; in a typical new 
media object. Nethertheless, rather than concluding that in Legrady&rsquo;s installation 
does not really create narratives, we should recognize it instead is an important 
example of a whole trend among new media artists: to explore the minimal 

 

&#xC; 
228

297

 Even more relevant is the 

298

299

The computer spaces just discussed, from Aspen Movie Map to Forest, 

condition of a narrative. In the later section &ldquo;New Temporality: Loop as a 
Narrative Engine&rdquo; I will discuss these investigations in relation to another new 
media convention: the loop.    
 
each establish a distinct aesthetic of their own. However, the majority of 
navigable virtual spaces mimic existing physical reality without proposing any 
coherent aesthetic programs. What artistic and theoretical traditions can the 
designers of navigable spaces draw upon to make them more interesting? One 
obvious candidate is modern architecture. From Melnikov, Le Corbusier and 
Frank Lloyd Wright to Arhigram  and Bernard Tschumi, modern architects 
elaborated a variety of schemes for structuring and conceptualizing space to be 
navigated by users. Using a few examples from these architects, we can look at 
the 1925 USSR Pavilion (Melnikov,), Villa Savoye (Le Corbusier), Walking City 
(Arhigram), and Parc de la Villette (Tschumi).
tradition of "paper architecture" &mdash; the designs which were not intended to be 
built and whose authors therefore felt unencumbered by the limitations of 
materials, gravity and budgets.
 Another highly relevant tradition is film 
architecture.
 As discussed in the "Theory of Cultural Interfaces" section, the 
standard interface to computer space is the virtual camera modeled after a film 
camera, rather than a simulation of unaided human sight. After all,  film 
architecture is The architecture designed for navigation and exploration by a film 
camera.  
Along with different architectural traditions, designers of navigable spaces 
 
can find a wealth of relevant ideas in modern art. They may consider, for instance, 
the works of modern artists which exist between art and architecture and which, 
like projects of paper architects, display spatial imagination not tied up to the 
questions of utility and economy: warped worlds of Jean Dubuffet, mobiles by 
Alexander Calder, earth works by Robert Smithson, moving text spaces by Jenny 
Holzer. While many modern artists felt compelled to create 3D structures in real 
spaces, others were satisfied with painting their virtual worlds: think, for, 
instance, of melancholic cityscapes by Giorgio de Chirico, biomorphic worlds by 
Yves Tanguy, economical wireframe structures by Alberto Giacometti, existential 
landscapes by Anselm Kiefer. Besides providing us with many examples of 
imaginative spaces, both abstract and figurative, modern painting is relevant to 
the design of virtual navigable spaces in two additional ways. First, since new 
media is most often experienced, like painting, via a rectangular frame (see &ldquo;The 
Screen and the User&rdquo;), virtual architects can study how painters organized their 
spaces within the constraints of a rectangle. Second, modern painters who belong 
to what I call the &ldquo;space-medium&rdquo; tradition elaborated the concept of space as a 
homogeneous dense field, where everything is made from the same &ldquo;stuff&rdquo;  &mdash; in 
contrast to architects which always have to work with a basic dichotomy between 

 

&#xC; 
229

the build structure and the empty space. And although virtual spaces realized until 
now, with the possible exception of Osmose, follow the same dichotomy between 
rigid objects and a void between them, on the level of material organization they 
are intrinsically related to the monistic ontology of modern painters such as 
Matta, Giacometti, or Pollock, for everything in them is also made from the same 
material &mdash; pixels, on the level of surface; polygons or voxels, on the level of 3D 
representation). Thus virtual computer space is structurally closer to modern 
painting than to architecture. 

Along with painting, a genre of modern art which has a particular 

 In contrast, by creating a separate enclosed space with carefully 

For Kabakov, "total" installation has a double identity. On the one hand, it 

relevance to the design of navigable virtual spaces is installation. Seen in the 
context of new media, many installations can be thought of as dense multimedia 
information spaces. They combine images, video, texts, graphics and 3D elements 
within a spatial layout. While most installations leave it up to the viewer to 
determine the order of &ldquo;information access&rdquo; to their elements,  one of the most 
well-known installation artists, Ilya Kabakov, elaborated a system of strategies to 
structure the viewer's navigation through his spaces.
 According to Kabakov, in 
most installations  "the viewer is completely free because the space surrounding 
her and the installation remain completely indifferent to the installation it 
encloses."
chosen proportions, colors and lighting within the larger space of a museum or a 
gallery, Kabakov aims to completely "immerse" the viewer inside his installation. 
He calls this installation type a "total installation."  
 
belongs to plastic arts designed to be viewed by an immobile spectator &mdash; 
painting, sculpture, architecture. On the other hand, it also belongs to time-based 
arts such as theater and cinema. We can say the same about virtual navigable 
spaces. Another concept of Kabakov&rsquo;s theory which is directly applicable to 
virtual space design is his distinction between the spatial structure of an 
installation and its dramaturgy, i.e. the time-space structure created by the 
movement of a viewer through an installation.
 Kabakov&rsquo;s strategies of 
dramaturgy include dividing the total space of an installation into two or more 
connected spaces; creating a well-defined path through the space which does not 
preclude the viewer from wandering on her own, yet prevents her from feeling 
being lost and being bored. To make such a path, Kabakov constructs corridors 
and abrupt openings between objects, he also places objects in strange places to 
obstruct passage where one expects to discover a clear pathway. Another strategy 
of &ldquo;total installation&rdquo; is the choice of particular kinds of narratives which lead 
themselves to spatialization. These are the narratives which take place around a 
main event which becomes the center of an installation: "the beginning [of the 
installation] leads to the main event [of the narrative] while the last part exists 
after the event took place." Yet another strategy involves the positioning of text 

300

302

301

 

&#xC; 
230

within the space of an installation as a way to orchestrate the attention and 
navigation of the viewer. For instance, placing two to three pages of texts at a 
particular point in the space creates a rhythmic stop in the navigation rhythm.
Finally, Kabakov "directs" the viewer to keep alternating between focusing her 
attention on particular details and the installation as a whole. He describes these 
two kinds of spatial attention (which we can also correlate with haptic and optic 
perception as theorized by Riegl and others) as follows: "wandering, total 
("summarnaia") orientation in space &mdash; and active, well-aimed 'taking in' of 
partial, small, the unexpected."

304

303

  

 

All these strategies can be directly applied to the design of virtual 

navigable spaces (and interactive multimedia in general). In particular, Kabakov 
is very successful in making the viewers of his installations carefully read 
significant amounts of text included in them &mdash; something which represents a 
constant challenge for new media designers. His constant emphasis on always 
thinking about the viewer's attention and reaction to what she will encounter &mdash; 
"the reaction of the viewer during her movement through the installation is the 
main concern of her designer&hellip; The loss of the viewer's attention is the end of the 
installation"
 &mdash; is also an important lesson to new media designers who often 
forgot that what they are designing is not an object in itself but a viewer's 
experience in time and space. 

305

I have used the word "strategy" to refer to Kabakov&rsquo;s techniques on 

purpose. To evoke the terminology of The Practice of Everyday Life by French 
writer Michel de Certeau, Kabakov uses strategies to impose a particular matrix 
of space, time, experience and meaning on his viewers; they, in their turn, use 
"tactics" to create their own trajectories (this is a term actually used by de 
Certeau) within this matrix. If Kabakov is perhaps the most accomplished 
architect of navigable spaces, de Certeau can very well be their best theoretician. 
Like Kabakov, he never dealt with computer media directly, and yet his The 
Practice of Everyday Life has a multitude of ideas directly applicable to new 
media. His general notion of how a user's &ldquo;tactics&rdquo; which create their own 
trajectories through the spaces defined by others (both metaphorically, and, in the 
case of spatial tactics, literally) is a good model to think about computer users 
navigating through computer spaces they did not design:  
 

Although they are composed with the vocabularies of established 
languages (those of television, newspapers, supermarkets of established 
sequences) and although they remain subordinated to prescribed 
syntactical forms (temporal modes of schedules, paradigmatic orders of 
spaces, etc.), the trajectories trace out the rules of other interests and 
desires that are neither determined, nor captured by, the system in which 
they develop.

306

  

 

&#xC; 
231

307

In his famous 1863 essay "The Painter of Modern Life", Charles Baudelaire 
 (Recent history 

 
The Navigator and the Explorer  
 
Why is navigable space such a popular construct in new media? What are the historical 
origins and precedents of this form?  
 
documented the new modern male urban subject &mdash; the fl&acirc;neur.
of visual culture, film theory, cultural history and writings on cyberculture has 
already invoked the figure of the fl&acirc;neur much too often; my justification for 
invoking it once again here is that I hope to use it in new ways.) An anonymous 
observer, the fl&acirc;neur navigates through the space of a Parisian crowd, recording 
and immediately erasing the faces and the figures of the passers-by in his memory. 
From time to time, his gaze meets the  gaze of a passing woman, engaging her in a 
split-second virtual affair, only to be unfaithful to her with the next female passer-
by. The fl&acirc;neur is only truly at home in one place &mdash; moving through the crowd. 
Baudelaire writes: "To the perfect spectator, the impassioned observer, it is an 
immense joy to make his domicile amongst numbers, amidst fluctuation and 
movement, amidst the fugitive and infinite&hellip; To be away from home, and yet to 
feel at home; to behold the world, to be in the midst of the world and yet to remain 
hidden from the world." There is a theory of navigable virtual spaces hidden here, 
and we can turn to Walter Benjamin to help us in articulating  it. According to 
Benjamin, the fl&acirc;neur&rsquo;s navigation transforms the space of the city: "The Crowd is 
the veil through which the familiar city lures the fl&acirc;neur like a phantasmargonia. In 
it the city is now a landscape, now a room."
subjective space, its architecture responding to the subject&rsquo;s movement and 
emotion. In the case of the fl&acirc;neur moving through the physical city, this 
transformation of course only happens in the fl&acirc;neur&rsquo;s perception, but in the case 
of navigation through a virtual space, the space can literally change, becoming a 
mirror of the user&rsquo;s subjectivity. The virtual spaces built on this principle can be 
found in such films as Waliczky's The Garden and The Dark City (Alex Proyas, 
1998). 
 
Following European tradition, the subjectivity of the fl&acirc;neur is determined 
by his interaction with a group &mdash; even though it is a group of strangers. In place 
of a close-knit community of a small-scale traditional society (Gemeinschaft) we 
now have an anonymous association of a modern society (Gesellshaft).
 We can 
interpret the fl&acirc;neur&rsquo;s behavior as a response to this historical shift. It is as though 
he is trying to compensate for the loss of a close relationship with his group by 
inserting himself into the anonymous crowd. He thus exemplifies the historical 
shift from Gemeinschaft to Gesellshaft, and the fact that he only feels at home in 
the crowd of strangers shows the psychological price paid for modernization. Still, 
the subjectivity of the fl&acirc;neur is, in its essence, intersubjectivity: the exchange of 

308

 The navigable space thus is a 

309

 

&#xC; 
232

A very different image of a navigation through space &mdash; and of 

Both the fl&acirc;neur and the explorer find their expression in different subject 

glances between him and the other human beings.    
 
subjectivity &mdash; is presented in the novels of nineteenth century American writers 
such as James Fenimore Cooper (1789-1851) or Mark Twain (1835-1910). The 
main character of Cooper's novels, the wilderness scout Natty Bumppo, alias 
Leatherstocking, navigates through spaces of nature rather than culture. Similarly, 
in Twain's Huckleberry Finn, the narrative is organized around the voyage of the 
two boy heroes down the Mississippi River. Instead of the thickness of the urban 
human crowd which is the milieu of a Parisian fl&acirc;neur, the heroes of these 
American novels are most at home in the wilderness, away from the city. They 
navigate forests and rivers, overcoming obstacles and fighting enemies. The 
subjectivity is constructed through the conflicts between the subject and nature, 
and between the subject and his enemies, rather than through interpersonal 
relations within a group. This structure finds its ultimate expression in the unique 
American form, the Western, and its hero, the cowboy &mdash; a lonely explorer who 
only occasionally shows up in town to get a drink at the bar. Rather than 
providing the home for the cowboy, as it does for the fl&acirc;neur, the town is a hostile 
place, full of conflict, which eventually erupts into the inevitable showdown.  
 
positions, or phenotypes, of new media users. Media theoretician and activist 
Geert Lovink describes the figure of the present-day media user and Net surfer 
whom he calls the Data Dandy. Although Lovink's reference is Oscar Wilde 
rather than Baudelaire, his Data Dandy exhibits the behaviors which also qualify 
him to be called a Data Fl&acirc;neur. "The Net is to the electronic dandy what the 
metropolitan street was for the historical dandy."
 A perfect aesthete, the Data 
Dandy loves to display his private and totally irrelevant collection of data to other 
Net users. "Wrapped in the finest facts and the most senseless gadgets, the new 
dandy deregulates the time economy of the info = money managers... if the 
anonymous crowd in the streets was the audience of the Boulevard dandy, the 
logged-in Net-users are that of the data dandy."
dandyism, the data dandy does not want to be above the crowd; like Baudelaire's 
fl&acirc;neur, he wants to lose himself in its mass, to be moved by the semantic vectors 
of mass media icons, themes and trends. As Lovink points out, a data dandy "can 
only play with the rules of the Net as a non-identity. What is exclusivity in the age 
of differentiation?...Data dandyism is born of an aversion of being exiled into a 
subculture of one's own."
in data space ("Cologne and pink stockings have been replaced by precious 
Intel"), the Data Dandy does have a dress code of his own. This look is popular 
with new media artists of the 1990s: no labels, no distinct design, no bright colors 
or extravagant shapes &mdash; a non-identity which is nevertheless paraded as style and 
which in fact is carefully constructed (as I learned while shopping in Berlin in 

311

 While displaying his 

310

312

 Although Lovink positions Data Dandy exclusively 

 

&#xC; 
233

313

 

If the Net surfer, who keeps posting to mailing lists and newsgroups and 

1997 with Russian net.artist Alexei Shulgin.) The designers who exemplify this 
style in the 1990s are Hugo Boss and Prada, whose restrained no-style style 
contrasts with the opulence of Versace and Gucci, the stars of the 1980s era of 
exess. The new style of non-identity perfectly corresponds to the rise of the Net, 
where endless mailing lists, newsgroups, and sites delude any single topic, image 
or idea &mdash; "On the Net, the only thing which appears as a mass is information 
itself... Today's new theme is tomorrow's 23 newsgroups."
 
accumulating endless data, is a reincarnation of Baudelaire's fl&acirc;neur, the user 
navigating a virtual space assumes the position of the nineteenth century explorer, 
a character from Cooper and Twain. This is particularly true for the navigable 
spaces of computer games. The dominance of spatial exploration in games 
exemplifies the classical American mythology in which the individual discovers 
his identity and builds character by moving through space. Correspondingly, in 
many American novels and short stories (O&rsquo;Henry, Hemingway) narrative is 
driven by the character&rsquo;s movements in the outside space. In contrast, in the 19th 
century European novels there is not much movement in physical space, because 
the action takes place in a psychological space. From this perspective, most 
computer games follow the logic of American rather than European narrative. 
Their heroes are not developed and their psychology is not represented. But, as 
these heroes move through space, defeating enemies, acquiring resources and, 
more importantly, skill, they are "building character." This is particularly true for 
Role Playing Games (RPG) whose narrative is one of self-improvement. But it 
also holds for other game genres (action, adventure, simulators) which put the 
user in command of a character (Doom, Mario, Tomb Rider). As the character 
progresses through the game, the user herself or himself acquires new skills and 
knowledge. She learns how to outwit the mutants lurking in Doom levels, how to 
defeat the enemies with just a few kicks in Tomb Rider, how to solve the secrets 
of the playful world in Mario, and so on.
 
theme of American frontier mythology, another is exploring and "culturing" 
unknown space. This theme is also reflected in computer games&rsquo; structure. A 
typical game begins at some point in a large unknown space; in the course of the 
game, the player has to explore this space, mapping out its geography and 
unraveling its secrets. In the case of games organized into discrete levels such as 
Doom, the player has to systematically investigate all the spaces of a given level 
before he can move to the next level. In other game which takes place over one 
large territory, the game play gradually involves larger and larger parts of this 
territory (Adventure, War Craft). 

While movement through space as a means of building character is one 

314

  

This is one possible theory, one historical trajectory: from fl&acirc;neur to Net 
surfer; from nineteenth century American explorer to the explorer of navigable 
virtual space. Although this section focuses on navigating a space in a literal 

 

&#xC; 
234

315

sense, i.e. moving through a 3D virtual space, this concept is also a key metaphor 
used to conceptualize new media. From the 1980s concept of cyberspace to the 
1990s software such as Netscape Navigator, interacting with computerized data 
and media has been consistently framed in spatial terms. Computer scientists 
adopted this metaphor as well: they use the term navigation to refer to different 
methods of organizing and accessing hypermedia, even though a 3D virtual space 
interface is not at all the most common method. For instance, in his Elements of 
Hypermedia Design Peter Gloor lists &ldquo;seven design concepts for navigation in 
dataspace&rdquo;: linking, searching, sequentialization, hierarchy, similarity, mapping, 
guides and agents.
 Thus, &ldquo;navigating the Internet&rdquo; includes following the 
hyperlinks, using menus commonly provided by Web sites, as well as using 
search engines. If we accept this spatial metaphor, both the nineteenth century 
European fl&acirc;neur and the American explorer find their reincarnation in the figure 
of the net surfer. We may even correlate these two historical figures with the 
names of two most popular Web browsers: the fl&acirc;neur of Baudelaire &mdash; Netscape 
Navigator; an explorer of Cooper, Twain and Hemingway &mdash; Internet Explorer. 
Of course, names apart, these two browsers are functionally quite similar. 
However, given that they both focus on a single user navigating through the Web 
sites rather than more communal experiences, such as newsgroups, mailing lists, 
text-based chat and IRC, we can say that they privilege the explorer rather than 
the fl&acirc;neur &mdash; single user navigating through an unknown territory rather than a 
member of a group, even is this group is a crowd of strangers. And although 
different software solutions have been developed to make Internet navigation 
more of a social experience &mdash; for instance, allowing remote users to 
simultaneously navigate the same Web site together; or allowing the user to see 
who already accessed a particular document &mdash; an individual navigation through 
the &ldquo;history-free&rdquo; data stilled remained the norm at the end of the 1990s. 
 
 
Kino-Eye and Simulators 
 
It is also possible to construct a different trajectory which will lead from the 
Parisian flaneurie to navigable computer spaces. In Window Shopping film 
historian Anne Friedberg presents an archeology of a mode of perception which, 
according to her, characterizes modern cinematic, televisual, and cyber cultures 
and which she calls a &ldquo;mobilized virtual gaze.&rdquo;
conditions: &ldquo;a received perception mediated through representation&rdquo; and a travel 
&ldquo;in an imaginary flanerie through an imaginary elsewhere and an imaginary 
elsewhen.&rdquo;
 According to Friedberg&rsquo;s archeology, this mode emerged when a 
new nineteenth century technology of virtual representation &mdash; photography &mdash; 
merged with the mobilized gaze of tourism, urban shopping and flanerie.
 As 

 This mode combines two 

317

 

316

318

&#xC; 
235

319

 The fl&acirc;neur occupies the privileged position 

can be seen, Friedberg connects Baudelaire's fl&acirc;neur with a range of other modern 
practices: &ldquo;The same impulses which send fl&acirc;neurs through the arcades, 
traversing the pavement and wearing thin their shoe leather, sent shoppers into the 
department stores, tourists to exhibitions, spectators into the panorama, diaroma, 
wax museum, and cinema.&rdquo;
among these practices because he embodied most strongly the desire to combine 
perception with motion through a space. All that remained in order to arrive at a 
&ldquo;mobilized virtual gaze&rdquo; was to virtualize this perception &mdash; something which 
cinema accomplished in the last decade of the nineteenth century.  
 
While Friederg&rsquo;s account ends with television and does consider new 
media, the form of navigable virtual space fits well in her historical trajectory. 
Navigation through a virtual space, whether in a computer game, a motion 
simulator, data visualizations or a 3D human-computer interface, follows the logic 
of a &ldquo;virtual mobile gaze.&rdquo; Instead of Parisian streets, shopping windows and the 
faces of the passers-by, the virtual fl&acirc;neur travels through virtual streets, 
highways and planes of data; the eroticism of a split-second virtual affair with a 
passer-by of the opposite sex is replaced with the excitement of locating and 
opening a particular file or zooming into the virtual object. Just as the original 
fl&acirc;neur of Baudelaire, the virtual fl&acirc;neur is happiest on the move, clicking from 
one object to another, traversing room after room, level after level, data volume 
after data volume.  

Thus, just as a database form can be seen as an expression of &lsquo;database 

complex,&rsquo; an irrational desire to preserve and store everything, navigable space is 
not just a purely functional interface. Ii is also an expression and gratification of 
psychological desire; a state of being; a subject position &mdash; or rather, a subject&rsquo;s 
trajectory. If the subject of modern society was looking for refuge from the chaos 
of the real world in the stability and balance of the static composition of a 
painting, and later in cinema&rsquo;s image, the subject of the information society finds 
peace in the knowledge that she can slide over endless fields of data, locating any 
morsel of information with the click of a button, zooming through file systems 
and networks. She is comforted not by the equilibrium of shapes and colors, but 
by the variety of data manipulation operations at her control.  

Does this mean that we have reached the end of the trajectory described by 
Friederg? While still enjoying a privileged place in computer culture, flanerie now 
shows its age. Here we can make an analogy with the history of GUI (Graphical 
User Interface). Developed at Xerox Park in the 1970s and commercialized by 
Apple in the early 1980s, it was appropriate when a typical user&rsquo;s hard drive 
contained dozens or even hundreds of files. But for the next stage of Net-based 
computing in which the user is accessing millions of files it is no longer 
sufficient.
the user resorts to a text-based search engine. Similarly, while a &ldquo;mobilized 
virtual gaze,&rdquo; described by Friederg, was a significant advancement over earlier 

 Bypassing the ability to display and navigate the files graphically, 

320

 

&#xC; 
236

In the 1920s Dziga Vertov already understood this very well. A Man with 

more static methods of data organization and access (static image, text, catalog, 
library), in the information age its &ldquo;bandwidth&rdquo; is too limited. Moreover, a simple 
simulation of movement through a physical space defeats a computer&rsquo;s new 
capabilities of data access and manipulation. Thus, for a virtual fl&acirc;neur such 
operations as search, segmentation, hyperlinking and visualization and data 
mining are more satisfying than just navigating through a simulation of a physical 
space.  
 
a Movie Camera is an important point in the trajectory which leads from 
Baudelaire's flanerie to Aspen Movie Map, Doom and VRML worlds not simply 
because Vertov&rsquo;s film is structured around the camera&rsquo;s active exploration of city 
spaces, and not only because it fetishizes the camera&rsquo;s mobility. Vertov wanted to 
overcome the limits of human vision and human movement through space to 
arrive at more efficient ways of data access. However, the data he worked with is 
raw visible reality &mdash; not reality digitized and stored in computer&rsquo;s memory as 
numbers. Similarly, his interface was a film camera, i.e. an anthropomorphic 
simulation of human vision &mdash; not computer algorithms. Thus Vertov stands half-
way between Baudelaire's fl&acirc;neur and computer user: no longer just a pedestrian 
walking through a street, but not yet Gibson&rsquo;s data cowboy who zooms through 
pure data armed with data mining algorithms. 

In his research on what can be called &ldquo;kino-eye interface,&rdquo; Vertov 

systematically tried different ways to overcome what he thought were the limits of 
human vision. He mounted cameras on the roof of a building and a moving 
automobile; he slowed and speed up film speed; he superimposed a number of 
images together in time and space (temporal montage and montage within a shot). 
A Man with a Movie Camera is not only a database of city life in the 1920s, a 
database of film techniques, and a database of new operations of visual 
epistemology, but it is also a database of new interface operations which together 
aim to go beyond a simple human navigation through a physical space.    
Along with A Man with a Movie Camera, another key point in the 
 
trajectory, from the navigable space of a nineteenth century city to the virtual 
navigable computer space, is flight simulators. At the same time when Vertov was 
working on his film, young American engineer E.A. Link, Jr. developed the first 
commercial flight simulator. Significantly, Link&rsquo;s patent for his simulator filed in 
1930 refers to it as a &ldquo;Combination Training Device for Student Aviators and 
Entertainment Apparatus.&rdquo;
adaptation of flight simulator technology to consumer entertainment which took 
place in the 1990s was already envisioned by its inventor. Link&rsquo;s design was a 
simulation of a pilot&rsquo;s cockpit with all the controls, but, in contrast to a modern 
simulator, it had no visuals. In short, it was a motion ride without a movie. In the 
1960s, visuals were added by using new video technology. A video camera was 
mounted on a movable arm positioned over a room size model of an airport. The 

 Thus, rather than being an after-thought, the 

321

 

&#xC; 
237

movement of the camera was synchronized with the simulator controls; its image 
was transmitted to a video monitor in the cockpit. While useful, this approach was 
limited because it was based on physical reality of an actual model set. As we saw 
in the &ldquo;Compositing&rdquo; section, a filmed and edited image is a better simulation 
technology than a physical construction; and a virtual image controlled by a 
computer is better still. Not surprisingly, soon after interactive 3D computer 
graphics technology was developed, it was applied to produce visuals for the 
simulators by one of his developers. In 1968, Ivan Sutherland, who already 
pioneered interactive computer-aided design (&ldquo;Sketchpad,&rdquo; 1962) and virtual 
reality (1967), formed a company to produce computer-based simulators. In the 
1970s and 1980s simulators were one of the main applications of real-time 3D 
computer graphics technology, thus determining to a significant degree the way 
this technology was developed (see &ldquo;Synthetic Realism as Bricolage.&rdquo;) For 
instance, simulation of particular landscape features which are typically seen by a 
pilot, such as flat and mountain terrain, sky with clouds, and fog, all became 
important research problems.
 The application of interactive graphics for 
simulators has also shaped the imagination of researchers regarding how this 
technology can be used. It naturalized a particular idiom: flying through a 
simulated spatial environment.  

322

Thus, one of the most common forms of navigation used today in 

computer culture &mdash; flying through spatialized data &mdash; can be traced back to the 
1970s military simulators. From Baudelaire's fl&acirc;neur strolling through physical 
streets we move to Vertov's camera mounted on a moving car and then to the 
virtual camera of a simulator which represents the viewpoint of a military pilot. 
Although it was not an exclusive factor, the end of the Cold War played an 
important role in the extension of this military mode of perception into general 
culture. Until 1990, such companies as Evans and Sutherland, Boeing and 
Lockheed were busy developing multi-million simulators. As the military orders 
dried up, they had to look for consumer applications of their technology. During 
the 1990s, these and other companies converted their expensive simulators into 
arcade games, motion rides and other forms of location-based entertainment. By 
the end of the decade, Evans and Sutherland&rsquo;s list of products included image 
generators for use in military and aviation simulators; a virtual set technology for 
use in television production; Cyber Fighter, a system of networked game stations 
modeled after networked military simulators; and Virtual Glider, an immersive 
location-based entertainment station.
diminish and entertainment budgets soared, entertainment and military often came 
to share the same technologies and to employ the same visual forms. Probably the 
most graphic example of the ongoing circular transfer of technology and 
imagination between the military and the civilian sector in new media is the case 
of Doom. Originally developed and released over the Internet as a consumer game 
in 1993 by id software, it was soon picked by the U.S. Marine Corps who 

 As the military budgets continued to 

323

 

&#xC; 
238

324

customized it into a military simulator for group combat training.
using multi-million dollar simulators, the Army could now train soldiers on a $50 
game. The Marines, who were involved in the modifications, then went on to 
form their own company in order to market the customized Doom as a 
commercial game.  

 Instead of 

325

 Virilio went on to suggest that while space was the main 

The discussion of the military origins of navigable space form would be 
incomplete without acknowledging the pioneering work of Paul Virilio. In his 
brilliant 1984 book War and Cinema Virilio documented numerous parallels 
between military and film cultures of the twentieth century, including the use of a 
mobile camera moving through space in film in military aerial surveillance and 
cinematography.
category of the nineteenth century, the main category of the twentieth century was 
time. As already discussed in &ldquo;Teleaction,&rdquo; for Virilio, telecommunication 
technology eliminates the category of space altogether as it makes every point on 
Earth as accessible as any other &mdash; at least in theory. This technology also leads to 
real time politics, which require instant reactions to the events transmitted at the 
speed of light, and ultimately can only be handled efficiently by computers 
responding to each other without human intervention. From a post-Cold War 
perspective, Virilio&rsquo;s theory can be seen as another example of the imagination 
transfer from the military to civilian sector. In this case, techno-politics of the 
Cold War nuclear arms equilibrium between the two super powers, which at any 
moment were able to strike each other at any point on Earth, came to be seen by 
Virilio as a fundamentally new stage of culture, where real time triumphs over 
space.  

Although Virilio did not write on computer interface, the logic of his 

books suggests that the ideal computer interface for a culture of real time politics 
would be the War Room in Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying 
and Love the Bomb (Stanley Kubrick, 1964) with its direct lines of 
communication between the generals and the pilots; or DOS command lines with 
their military economy of command and response, rather than the more 
spectacular but inefficient VRML worlds. Yet, uneconomical and inefficient as it 
may be, navigable space interface is thriving across all areas of new media. How 
can we explain its popularity? Is it simply a result of cultural inertia? A left-over 
from the nineteenth century? A way to make the ultimately Alien space of a 
computer compatible with humans by anthropomorphizing it, superimposing a 
simulation of a Parisian flanerie over abstract data? A relic of Cold War culture? 

While all these answers make sense, it would be unsatisfactory to see 
navigable space as only the end of a historical trajectory, rather than as a new 
beginning. The few computer spaces discussed here point toward some of the 
aesthetic possibilities of this form; more possibilities are contained in the works of 
modern painters, installation artists and architects. Theoretically as well, 
navigable space represents a new challenge. Rather than only considering 

 

&#xC; 
239

topology, geometry and logic of a static space, we need to take into account the 
new way in which space functions in computer culture: as something traversed by 
a subject, as a trajectory rather than an area. But computer culture is not the only 
field where the use of the category of navigable space makes sense. I will now 
briefly look at two other fields &mdash; anthropology and architecture &mdash; where we find 
more examples of &ldquo;navigable space imagination.&rdquo; 

In his book Non-places. Introduction to an Anthropology of 

326

327

 Auge's main source for his distinction between place and 

Supermodernity French anthropologist Marc Auge advances the hypothesis that 
&ldquo;supermodernity produces non-places, meaning spaces which are not themselves 
anthropological places and which, unlike Baudelairean modernity, do not 
 Place is what anthropologists have studied 
integrate with earlier places.&rdquo;
traditionally; it is characterized by stability, and it supports stable identity, 
relations and history.
space, or non-place, is Michel de Certeau: &ldquo;Space, for him, is a &lsquo;frequent place,&rsquo; 
&lsquo;an intersection of moving bodies&rsquo;: it is the pedestrians who transform a street 
(geometrically defined as a place by town planners) into a space&rdquo;; it is an 
animation of a place by the motion of a moving body.
 Thus, from one 
perspective we can understand place as a product of cultural producers, while 
non-places are created by users; in other words, non-place is an individual 
trajectory through a place. From another perspective, in supermodernity, 
traditional places are replaced by equally institutionalized non-places, a new 
architecture of transit and impermanence: hotel chains and squats, holiday clubs 
and refugee camps, supermarkets, airports and highways. Non-place becomes the 
new norm, the new way of existence.  
 
supermodernity, Auge picks up the counterpart to the pilot or a user of a flight 
simulator &mdash; an airline passenger. &ldquo;Alone, but one of many, the user of a non-place 
has contractual relations with it.&rdquo; This contract relieves the person of his usual 
determinants. &ldquo;He becomes  no more than what he does or experiences in the role 
of passenger, customer or driver.&rdquo;
places create the organically social, so non-places create solitary contractuality,&rdquo; 
something which he sees as the very opposite of a traditional object of sociology: 
&ldquo;Try to imagine a Durkheimian analysis of a transit lounge at Roissy!&rdquo;
 
Architecture by its very definition stands on the side of order, society and 
rules; it is thus a counterpart of sociology as it deals with regularities, norms and 
"strategies" (to use de Certeau&rsquo;s term). Yet the very awareness of these 
assumptions underlying architecture led many contemporary architects to focus 
their attention on the activities of users who through their "speech acts" 
"reappropriate the space organized by the techniques of sociocultural production" 
(de Certeau).
 Architects come to accept that the structures they design will be 

It is interesting that as the subject who exemplifies the condition of 

 Auge concludes that &ldquo;as anthropological 

330

 

328

329

331

 

&#xC; 
240

332

modified by users&rsquo; activities, and that these modifications represent an essential 
part of architecture. They also took up the challenge of "a Durkheimian analysis 
of a transit lounge at Roissy," putting their energy and imagination into design of 
non-places such as an airport (Kansai International Airport in Osaka by Renzo 
Piano), a train terminal (Waterloo International Terminal in London by Nicholas 
Grimshaw) or a highway control station (Steel Cloud or Los Angeles West Coast 
Gateway by Asymptote Architecture group).
 Probably the ultimate in non-
place architecture has been one million square meter Euralille project which 
redefined the existing city of Lille, France as the transit zone between the 
Continent and London. The project attracted some of the most interesting 
contemporary architects: Rem Koolhaas designed the masterplan while Jean 
Nouvel built Centre Euralille containing a shopping center, a school, a hotel, and 
apartments next to the train terminal. Centered around the entrance to the 
Chunnel, the underground tunnel for cars which connects the Continent and 
England, and the terminal for the high speed train which travels between Lille, 
London, Brussels and Paris, Euralille is a space of navigation par excellence; a 
mega-non-place. Like the network players of Doom, Euralille users emerge from 
trains and cars to temporarily inhabit a zone defined through their trajectories; an 
environment "to just wander around inside of" (Robyn Miller); "an intersection of 
moving bodies" (de Certeau). 
 
 
EVE and Place 
 
We have come a long way since Spacewar (1962) and Computer Space (1971) &mdash; 
at least, in terms of graphics. The images of these early computer games seem to 
have more in common with abstract paintings of Malevich and Mondrian than 
with the photorealistic renderings of Quake (1996) and Unreal (1997). But 
whether this graphics evolution was also accompanied by a conceptual evolution 
is another matter. Given the richness of modern concepts of space developed by 
artists, architects, filmmakers, art historians and anthropologists, our computer 
spaces have a long way to go.  
 
designers of virtual spaces may find a wealth of relevant ideas by looking at 
twentieth century art, architecture, film and other arts. Similarly, some of the 
earliest computer spaces, such as Spacewar  and Aspen Movie Map, contained 
aesthetic possibilities which are still waiting to be explored. As a conclusion, I 
will discuss two more works by Jeffrey Shaw who draws upon various cultural 
traditions of space construction and representation probably more systematically 
more than any other new media artist.   

Often the way to go forward is to go back. As this section suggested, the 

While Friedberg&rsquo;s concept of virtual mobile gaze is useful in allowing us 
to see the connections between a number of  technologies and practices of spatial 

 

&#xC; 
241

333

 In these works, Shaw evokes the 

navigation, such as Panorama, cinema and shopping, it can also make us blind to 
the important differences between them. In contrast, Shaw&rsquo;s EVE (1993 &mdash; ) and 
Place: A User&rsquo; Manual (1995) emphasize both similarities and differences 
between various technologies of navigation.
navigation methods of Panorama, cinema, video and VR. But rather than 
collapsing different technologies into one, Shaw "layers" them on side by side. 
That is, he literally encloses the interface of one technology within the interface of 
another. For instance, in the case of  EVE  the visitors find themselves inside a 
large semi-sphere reminiscent of the 19th century Panorama. The projectors 
located in the middle of the sphere throw a rectangular image on the inside 
surface of the semi-sphere. In this way, the interface of cinema (an image 
enclosed by a rectangular frame) is placed inside the interface of Panorama (a 
semi-spherical enclosed space). In Place: A User&rsquo; Manual a different "layering" 
takes place: Panorama interface is placed inside a typical computer space 
interface. The user navigates a virtual landscape using first-person perspective 
characteristic of VR, computer games and navigable computer spaces in general. 
Inside this landscape are eleven cylinders with photographs mapped on them. 
Once the user moves inside one of these cylinders, she switches to a mode of 
perception typical of Panorama tradition.  

By placing interfaces of different technologies next to each other within a 

single work, Shaw foregrounds the unique logic of seeing, spatial access and 
user&rsquo;s behavior characteristic of each technology.  The tradition of the framed 
image , i.e. a representation which exists within the larger physical space which 
contains the viewer  (painting, cinema, computer screen), meets the tradition of 
the "total" simulation, or &ldquo;immersion,&rsquo; i.e. a simulated space which encloses the 
viewer (Panorama, VR).    

Another historical dichotomy staged for us by Shaw is between the 

traditions of collective and individualized viewing in screen-based arts. The first 
tradition spans from magic lantern shows to twentieth century cinema. The second 
passes from the camera obscura, stereoscope and kinescope to head-mounted 
displays of VR. Both have their dangers. In the first tradition, individual's 
subjectivity can be dissolved in a mass-induced response. In the second, 
subjectivity is being defined through the interaction of isolated subject with an 
object at the expense of intersubjective dialogue. In the case of viewers' 
interactions with computer installations, as I already noted when talking about 
Osmose, something quite new begins to emerge: a combination of individualized 
and collective spectatorship. The interaction of one viewer with the work (via a 
joystick, a mouse, or a head mounted sensor) becomes in itself a new text for 
other viewers, situated within the work's arena, so to speak. This affects the 
behavior of this viewer who acts as a representative for the desires of others, and 
who is now oriented both to them and to the work.  

 

&#xC; 
242

334

 At the same time, EVE's enclosed round shape refers us 

EVE rehearses the whole Western history of simulation, functioning as a 

 
kind of Plato's cave in reverse: visitors progress from the real world inside the 
space of simulation where instead of mere shadows they are presented with 
technologically enhanced (via stereo) images, which look more real than their 
normal perceptions.
back to the fundamental modern desire to construct a perfect self-sufficient 
utopia, whether visual (the nineteenth-century panorama) or social. (For instance, 
after 1917 Russian Revolution architect G.I. Gidoni designed a monument to the 
Revolution in the form of a semi-transparent globe which could hold several 
thousand spectators.) Yet, rather than being presented with a simulated world 
which has nothing to do with the real space of the viewer (as in typical VR), the 
visitors who enter EVE's enclosed space discover that EVE's apparatus shows the 
outside reality they just left. Moreover, instead of being fused in a single 
collective vision (Gesamtkunstwerk, cinema, mass society) the visitors are 
confronted with a subjective and partial view. The visitors only see what one 
person wearing a head mounted sensor chooses to show them, i.e. they are 
literally limited by this person's point of view. In addition, instead of a 360o view 
they see a small rectangular image &mdash; a mere sample of the world outside. The 
one visitor wearing a sensor, and thus literally acting as an eye for the rest of the 
audience, occupies many positions at once &mdash; a master subject, a visionary who 
shows the audience what is worth seeing and at the same time just an object, an 
interface between them and outside reality, i.e., a tool for others; a projector, a 
light and a reflector all at once.    
 
Having examined the two key forms of new media &mdash; database and navigable 
space &mdash; it is tempting to see their privileged role in computer culture as a sign of 
a larger cultural change. If we use Auge&rsquo;s distinction between modernity and 
supermodernity, the following scheme can be established:  
 

 
&bull;  modernity &mdash; "supermodernity"  
&bull;  narrative (= hierarchy) &mdash; database, hypermedia, network (=  flattening 

of hierarchy) 
space &mdash; navigable space (trajectory through space)  
static architecture &mdash; &ldquo;liquid architecture.&rdquo;

&bull; 
&bull; 
&bull;  geometry and topology as theoretical models for cultural and social 

 335

 

analysis &mdash; trajectory, vector, flow as theoretical categories   

  

 
As can seen from this scheme, the two &ldquo;supermodern&rdquo; forms of database and 
navigable space are complimentary in their effects on the forms of modernity. On 
the one hand, a narrative is &ldquo;flattened&rdquo; into a database. A trajectory through 
events and/or time becomes a flat space. On the other hand, a flat space of 

 

&#xC; 
243

architecture or topology is narrativized, becoming a support for individual users&rsquo; 
trajectories.  

But this is only one possible scheme. What is, however, clear, is that we 

have left modernity for something else. We are still searching for names to 
describe it. Yet the names which we come up with &mdash; &ldquo;supermodernity,&rdquo; 
&ldquo;transmodernity,&rdquo; &ldquo;second modern&rdquo;  &ndash; all seems to reflect the sense of the 
continuity of this new stage with the old. If the 1980s concept of &ldquo;post-
modernism&rdquo; implied a break with modernity, we now seem to  
prefer to think of cultural history continuos trajectory through a single conceptual 
and aesthetic space. Having lived through the twentieth century we learned all too 
well the human price of  &ldquo;breaking with the past,&rdquo; &ldquo;building from scratch,&rdquo; 
&ldquo;making new&rdquo; and other similar claims &mdash; be it in the case of an aesthetic, moral 
or a social systems. The claim that new media should be totally new is only one in 
the long list of such claims.  

Such notion of a continuos trajectory is more compatible with human 

336

anthropology and phenomenology. Just as a human body moves through physical 
space in a continuos trajectory, the notion of history as a continuos trajectory is, in 
my view, preferable to the one which postulates epistemological breaks or 
paradigms shifts from one era to the next. This notion of Michel Foucault and 
Thomas Kuhn articulated in the 1960s belong to the aesthetics of modernist 
montage of Eisenstein and Godard rather than to our own era of the aesthetics of 
continuity as exemplified by compositing, morphing and navigable spaces.

  
They also seem to have projected onto a diachronic plane of history the 

traumatic synchronic division of their time &mdash; the split between the Capitalist 
West and the Communist East. But, with the official (although not necessary 
actual) collapse of this split in the 1990, we have seen how history reasserted its 
continuity in powerful and dangerous ways. The comeback of nationalism and 
religion; the desire to erase everything associated with the Communist regime and 
to return to the pre-1917 or pre-1945 (in the case of Russia and Eastern Europe, 
respectively) are only some of the more dramatic signs of this process. The price 
of radical break with the past is that the historical trajectory suddenly stopped in 
its development simply keeps accumulating potential energy until one day its 
reasserts itself with new force, breaking up into the open and crushing whatever 
new was created while it was stopped. 
 
media and the old, the interplay between historical repetition and innovation. I 
wanted to show how new media appropriates old forms and conventions of 
different media, in particular cinema. Like a river, cultural history can&rsquo;t suddenly 
change its course; its movement is that of a spline rather than a set of straight lines 
between points. In short I wanted to create trajectories through the space of 
cultural history which would pass through new media thus grounding it in what 
came back before. 

In this book I have chosen to emphasize the continuities between the new 

 

&#xC; 
244

 

VI. What is Cinema? 

 
 
It is useful to think about the relations between cinema and new media in terms of 
two main vectors. The first vector goes from cinema to new media, and it 
constitutes the backbone of this book. Chapters I &mdash; V used history and theory of 
cinema to map out the logic which drives the technical and stylistic development 
of new media. I also traced the key role which cinematic language is placing in 
new media interfaces &mdash; both traditional HCI (interface of the operating system 
and software applications) and what I called &ldquo;cultural interfaces&rdquo; &mdash; the interfaces 
between the human user and cultural data.   

The second vector goes in the opposite direction: from computers to 

cinema. How does computerization affects our very concept of a moving images? 
Does if offer new possibilities for film language? Did it led to the development of 
totally new forms of cinema? This last chapter is devoted to these questions. In 
part I already started dealing them in &ldquo;Compositing&rdquo; section and in &ldquo;Illusion&rdquo; 
chapter. Since the main part of this chapter focused on the new identity of a still 
computer generated image, it is logical that we now extend our inquiry to include 
moving images. 

Before proceeding I would like to offer two lists. My first list of the 
summary of how (at the time of writing &mdash; 1999) I think about the effects of 
computerization on cinema proper: 
 
1.  Use of computer techniques in traditional filmmaking: 

1.1. 3D computer animation / digital composing. Example:  

 
"Titanic" (James Cameron, 1997); &#x93;&ldquo;"The City of Lost Children" (Marc Caro 
and J.P. Jeunet, 1995). 

1.2. Digital painting. Example: "Forest Gump" (Robert Zemeckis, 1994).  
1.3. Virtual Sets. Example: "Ada" (Lynn Hershman,1997). 
1.4. Virtual Actors / Motion capture. Example: &#x93;&ldquo;Titanic.&#x94;&rdquo; 

 
 
 
 
2. New forms of computer-based cinema  

2.1. Motion rides / location-based entertainment. Example: rides produced 

2.2. &#x93;&ldquo;Typographic cinema&#x94;&rdquo;: film + graphic design + typography. 

by  
Douglas Trumball. 
 
Examples: film title sequences. 
 
Example: New Venue, one of the first onlines sites devoted to showcasing short 
digital films. In 1998 it accepted only QuickTime files under 5 MG.  

2.3. Net.cinema: films designed exclusively for Internet distribution. 

 

&#xC; 
245

2.4. Hypermedia interfaces to a film which allows non-linear access at 

     
different scales. Examples: "WaxWeb&#x94;&rdquo; (David Blair, 1994-1999); Stephen 
Mamber&#x92;&rsquo;s database interface to Hitchock&#x92;&rsquo;s &#x93;&ldquo;Psycho&#x94;&rdquo; (Mamber, 1996-).  

2.5. Interactive movies and games which are structured around film-like 

sequences. These sequences can be created using traditional film techniques 
(example: &#x93;&ldquo;Jonny Mnemonic&#x94;&rdquo; game) or computer animation (example: &#x93;&ldquo;Blade 
Runner&#x94;&rdquo; game). (The pioneer of interactive cinema is experimental filmmaker 
Graham Weinbren whose laserdisks Sonata and The Erl King are the true classics 
of this new form.) Note that it is hard to draw a strict line between such 
interactive movies and many other games which may not use traditional film 
sequences yet follow many other conventions of film language in their structure. 
From this perspective, the majority of 1990s computer games can be actually 
considered interactive movies.  

2.6. Animated, filmed, simulated or hybrid sequences which follow film 
language, and appear in HCI, Web sites, computer games and other areas of new 
media. Examples: transitions and QuickTime movies in Myst; FMV (full motion 
video) opening in Tomb Rider and many other games. 

The first section of this chapter, &#x93;&ldquo;Digital Cinema and the History of a Moving 
Image,&#x94;&rdquo; will focus on 1.1 &#x97;&mdash; 1.3. The second section, &#x93;&ldquo;New Language of 
Cinema,&#x94;&rdquo; will use examples drawn from 2.3 &#x97;&mdash; 2.6.337 

Note that this list does not include such new production technologies as 

DV (digital video) or new distribution technologies such as digital film projection 
or network film distribution which by 1999 was already used in Hollywood on a 
experimental basis; nor do I mention growing number of Web sites devoted to 
distribution of films.
important effect on the economics of film production and distribution, they do not 
appear to have a direct effect of film language, which is my main concern here. 
My second, and a  highly tentative list, summarizes some of the distinct 

 Although all these developments will undoubtedly have 

338

qualities of a computer-based image. This list pulls together arguments presented 
throughout the book so far. As I already noted in Chapter 1, I feel that it is 
important to pay attention not only to the new properties of a computer image 
which can be logically deduced from its new &ldquo;material&rdquo; status, but also to how 
images are actually used in computer culture. Therefore the number of properties 
on this list reflect the typical usage of images, rather some &ldquo;essential&rdquo; properties it 
may have because of its digital status. It is also legitimate to think of some of 
these qualities as particular consequences of the oppositions which define a 
concept of representation, summarized in the Introduction: 

  

 

&#xC; 
246

1.  Computer-based image is discrete, since it is broken into pixels. This makes it 

more like a human language (but not in the semiotic sense of having distinct 
units of meaning). 

2.  Computer-based image is modular, since it typically consists from a number 
of layers whose contents often correspond to meaningful parts of the image. 

3.  Computer-based image consists from two levels, a surface appearance and the 

underlying code (which may be the pixel values, a mathematical function or 
HTML code). In terms of its &ldquo;surface,&rdquo; an image participates in the dialog 
with other cultural objects. In terms of its code, an image exist on the same 
conceptual plane as other computer objects. (The surface-code pain can be 
related to signifier &mdash; signified, base &mdash; superstructure, unconscious &mdash; 
conscious pairs. So, just as a signifier exists in a structure with other signifiers 
of a language, a &ldquo;surface&rdquo; of an image, i.e. its &ldquo;contents&rdquo; enters in dialog with 
all other images in a culture.)    

4.  Computer-based images are typically compressed using lossy compression 

techniques, such as JPEG. Therefore, presence of noise (in a sense of 
undesirable artifacts and loss of original information) is its essential, rather 
than accidental, quality.  

5.  An image acquires the new role of an interface (for instance, imagemaps on 

the Web, or the image of a desktop as a whole in GUI ). Thus image becomes 
image-interface. In this role it functions as a portal into another world, like an 
icon in Middle Ages or a mirror in modern literature and cinema. Rather than 
staying on its surface, we expect to go &ldquo;into&rdquo; the image. In effect, every 
computer user becomes Carrol&rsquo;s Alice. Image can function as an interface 
because it can be &ldquo;wired&rdquo; to programming code; thus clicking on the image 
activates a computer program (or its part).  

6.  The new role of an image as image-interface competes with is older role as 

representation. Therefore, conceptually, a computer image is situated between 
two opposing poles: an illusionistic window into a fictional universe and a 
tool for computer control. The task of new media design and art is learn how 
to combine these two competing roles of an image.  

7.  Visually, this conceptual opposition translates into the opposition between a 
depth and surface, between a window into a fictional universe and a control 
panel. 

8.  Along with functioning as image-interfaces, computer images also functions 

as image-instruments. If image-interface controls a computer, an image-
instrument allows the user to remotely affect physical reality in real time. This 
ability not just to act but to &ldquo;teleact&rdquo; distinguishes new computer-based 
image-instrument from old image-instruments. Additionally, if before image-
instruments such as maps were clearly distinguished from illusionistic images, 
such as paintings (although recall Alpers&rsquo;s argument that classical Dutch 
painting combines both concepts), computer images often combine both 
functions. 

 

&#xC; 
247

9.  A computer image is frequently hyperlinked to other images, texts, and other 

media elements. Rather than being a self-enclosed entity it points, leads to, 
directs the user outside of itself towards something else. A moving image may 
also include hyperlinks (for instance, in QuickTime format.) We can say that a 
hyperlinked image, and hypermedia in general, &ldquo;externalizes&rdquo; Pierce&rsquo;s idea of 
infinite semiosis and Derrida&rsquo;s concept of infinite deferral of meaning &mdash; 
although this does not mean that this &ldquo;externalization&rdquo; automatically 
legitimizes these concepts. Rather than celebrating &ldquo;the convergence of 
technology and critical theory,&rdquo; we should use new media technology as an 
opportunity to question our accepted critical concepts and models.  

10. Variability and automation, these general principles of new media, also apply 

to images. For example, using a computer program a designer can 
automatically generate infinite versions of the same image which can vary in 
size, resolution, colors, composition and so on.   

11. From a single image which represented the &ldquo;cultural unit&rdquo; of a previous period 

we move to a database of images. Thus if the hero of Antonioni&rsquo;s Blow-up 
(1966) was looking for truth within a single photographic image, the 
equivalent of this operation in a computer age is to work with a whole 
database of many images, searching and comparing them with each other. 
(Although many contemporary films include scenes of image search, none of 
them makes it a subject of a film the way Blow-up focuses on zooming into a 
photograph. From this perspective, it is interesting that fifteen years later 
Blade Runner still applies &ldquo;old&rdquo; cinematic logic in relation to a computer-
based image. In a well-known scene the hero uses voice commands to direct a 
futuristic computer device to pan and zoom into an image. In reality already 
since the 1950s military used different computer techniques for image analysis 
to automatically identify objects represented in an image, detect changes in 
images over time, etc. which relied on databases of images.
) Any unique 
image you may desire probably already exists on the Internet or in some 
database. As I already noted, today the problem is no longer how to create the 
right image, but how to find already existing one.   

339

 
Since a computer-based moving image, just as its analog predecessor, is simply a 
sequence of still images, all these properties apply to it as well. To delineate the 
new qualities of a computer-based still image I compared it with other types of 
modern images commonly used before it &mdash; drawing, a map, a painting and most 
importantly, a still photograph. It would be logical to begin discussion of the 
computer-based moving image by also relating it to two most common types of 
moving images it replaces in its turn &mdash; the film image and an animated image. 
The first section, &ldquo;Digital Cinema and the History of a Moving Image&rdquo; does 
precisely this. It asks how the shift to computer-based representation and 
production processes redefines the identity of a moving image and the 

 

&#xC; 
248

relationship between cinema and animation. This section also invokes the 
question of computer-based illusionism, considering it in relation to animation, 
analog cinema and digital cinema. The following section &ldquo;The New Language of 
Cinema&rdquo; presents the examples of some of the new directions for film language 
&mdash; or, more generally, the language of moving images &mdash; opened up by 
computerization. My examples come from different areas where computer-based 
moving image are used: digital films, net.films, self-contained hypermedia, and 
Web sites. 
  

 

&#xC; 
249

 
 

Digital Cinema and the History of a Moving Image  

340

 
 
Cinema, the Art of the Index 
 
Most discussions of cinema in the computer age have focused on the possibilities 
of interactive narrative. It is not hard to understand why: since the majority of 
viewers and critics equate cinema with storytelling, computer media is understood 
as something which will let cinema tell its stories in a new way. Yet as exciting as 
the ideas of a viewer participating in a story, choosing different paths through the 
narrative space and interacting with characters may be, they only address one 
aspect of cinema which is neither unique nor, as many will argue, essential to it: 
narrative.   
The challenge which computer media poses to cinema extends far beyond 
 
the issue of narrative. Computer media redefines the very identity of cinema. In a 
symposium which took place in Hollywood in the Spring of 1996, one of the 
participants provocatively referred to movies as "flatties" and to human actors as 
"organics" and "soft fuzzies."
 As these terms accurately suggest, what used to 
be cinema's defining characteristics have become just the default options, with 
many others available. When one can "enter" a virtual three-dimensional space, to 
view flat images projected on the screen is hardly the only option. When, given 
enough time and money, almost everything can be simulated in a computer, to 
film physical reality is just one possibility. 
 
used to theorize cinema's past. French film theorist Christian Metz wrote in the 
1970s that "Most films shot today, good or bad, original or not, 'commercial' or 
not, have as a common characteristic that they tell a story; in this measure they all 
belong to one and the same genre, which is, rather, a sort of 'super-genre' ['sur-
genre']."
cinema, Metz did not bother to mention another characteristic of this genre 
because at that time it was too obvious: fictional films are live action films, i.e. 
they largely consist of unmodified photographic recordings of real events which 
took place in real physical space. Today, in the age of photorealistic 3D computer 
animation and digital compositing, invoking this characteristic becomes crucial in 
defining the specificity of twentieth century cinema. From the perspective of a 
future historian of visual culture, the differences between classical Hollywood 
films, European art films and avant-garde films (apart from abstract ones) may 
appear less significance than this common feature: that they  relied on lens-based 

This "crisis" of cinema's identity also affects the terms and the categories 

341

 In identifying fictional films as a "super-genre' of twentieth century 

 

&#xC; 
250

342

  

During cinema's history, a whole repertoire of techniques (lighting, art 

But what happens to cinema's indexical identity if it is now possible to 

Even for director Andrey Tarkovsky, film-painter par excellence, cinema's 

recordings of reality. This section is concerned with the effect of computerization 
on cinema as defined by its "super genre" as fictional live action film.
 
direction, the use of different film stocks and lens, etc.) was developed to modify 
the basic record obtained by a film apparatus. And yet behind even the most 
stylized cinematic images we can discern the bluntness, the sterility, the banality 
of early nineteenth century photographs. No matter how complex its stylistic 
innovations, the cinema has found its base in these deposits of reality, these 
samples obtained by a methodical and prosaic process. Cinema emerged out of 
the same impulse which engendered naturalism, court stenography and wax 
museums. Cinema is the art of the index; it is an attempt to make art out of a 
footprint.  
 
identity lay in its ability to record reality. Once, during a public discussion in 
Moscow sometime in the 1970s he was asked the question as to whether he was 
interested in making abstract films. He replied that there can be no such thing. 
Cinema's most basic gesture is to open the shutter and to start the film rolling, 
recording whatever happens to be in front of the lens. For Tarkovsky, an abstract 
cinema is thus impossible. 
 
generate photorealistic scenes entirely in a computer using 3D computer 
animation; to modify individual frames or whole scenes with the help a digital 
paint program; to cut, bend, stretch and stitch digitized film images into 
something which has perfect photographic credibility, although it was never 
actually filmed?      
 
This section will address the meaning of these changes in the filmmaking 
process from the point of view of the larger cultural history of the moving image.  
Seen in this context, the manual construction of images in digital cinema 
represents a return to nineteenth century pre-cinematic practices, when images 
were hand-painted and hand-animated. At the turn of the twentieth century, 
cinema was to delegate these manual techniques to animation and define itself as 
a recording medium. As cinema enters the digital age, these techniques are again 
becoming the commonplace in the filmmaking process. Consequently, cinema can 
no longer be clearly distinguished from animation. It is no longer an indexical 
media technology but, rather, a sub-genre of painting.   
 
This argument will be developed in two stages.  I will first follow a 
historical trajectory from nineteenth century techniques for creating moving 
images to twentieth-century cinema and animation. Next I will arrive at a 
definition of digital cinema by abstracting the common features and interface 
metaphors of a variety of computer software and hardware which are currently 
replacing traditional film technology. Seen together, these features and metaphors 
suggest a distinct logic of a digital moving image. This logic subordinates the 

 

&#xC; 
251

343

 

 

These earlier techniques shared a number of common characteristics. First, 

photographic and the cinematic to the painterly and the graphic, destroying 
cinema's identity as a media art. In the beginning of the next section &ldquo;New 
Language of Cinema&rdquo; I will examine different production contexts which already 
use digital moving images &mdash; Hollywood films, music videos, CD-ROM-based 
games and other stand-alone hypermedia &mdash; in order to see if and how this logic 
has begun to manifest itself.                
 
 
A Brief Archeology of Moving Pictures 
 
As testified by its original names (kinetoscope, cinematograph, moving pictures), 
cinema was understood, from its birth, as the art of motion, the art which finally 
succeeded in creating a convincing illusion of dynamic reality. If we approach 
cinema in this way (rather than the art of audio-visual narrative, or the art of a 
projected image, or the art of collective spectatorship, etc.), we can see it 
superseding previous techniques for creating and displaying moving images.  
 
they all relied on hand-painted or hand-drawn images. The magic lantern slides 
were painted at least until the 1850s; so were the images used in the 
Phenakistiscope, the Thaumatrope, the Zootrope, the Praxinoscope, the 
Choreutoscope and numerous other nineteenth century pro-cinematic devices. 
Even Muybridge's celebrated Zoopraxiscope lectures of the 1880s featured not 
   
actual photographs but colored drawings painted after the photographs.
Not only were the images created manually, they were also manually 
 
animated. In Robertson's Phantasmagoria, which premiered in 1799, magic 
lantern operators moved behind the screen in order to make projected images 
appear to advance and withdraw.
rather than his whole body, to put the images into motion. One animation 
technique involved using mechanical slides consisting of a number of layers. An 
 Another technique was 
exhibitor would slide the layers to animate the image.
to slowly move a long slide containing separate images in front of a magic lantern 
lens. Nineteenth century optical toys enjoyed in private homes also required 
manual action to create movement &mdash; twirling the strings of the Thaumatrope, 
rotating the Zootrope's cylinder, turning the Viviscope's handle.    
 
generation of images and their automatic projection were finally combined. A 
mechanical eye became coupled with a mechanical heart; photography met the 
motor. As a result, cinema &mdash; a very particular regime of the visible &mdash; was born. 
Irregularity, non-uniformity, the accident and other traces of the human body, 
which previously inevitably accompanied moving image exhibitions, were 
replaced by the uniformity of machine vision.
 A machine, which like a 

It was not until the last decade of the nineteenth century that the automatic 

344

 More often, an exhibitor used only his hands, 

345

346

 

&#xC; 
252

347

Cinema's most immediate predecessors share something else. As the 

Cinema also eliminated the discrete character of both space and movement 

conveyer belt, was now spitting out images, all sharing the same appearance, all 
the same size, all moving at the same speed, like a line of marching soldiers.  
 
in moving images. Before cinema, the moving element was visually separated 
from the static background as with a mechanical slide show or Reynaud's 
Praxinoscope Theater (1892).
 The movement itself was limited in range and 
affected only a clearly defined figure rather than the whole image. Thus, typical 
actions would include a bouncing ball, a raised hand or eyes, a butterfly moving 
back and forth over the heads of fascinated children &mdash; simple vectors charted 
across still fields.    
 
nineteenth-century obsession with movement intensified, devices which could 
animate more than just a few images became increasingly popular. All of them &mdash; 
the Zootrope, the Phonoscope, the Tachyscope, the Kinetoscope &mdash; were based on 
loops, sequences of images featuring complete actions which can be played 
repeatedly. The Thaumatrope (1825), in which a disk with two different images 
painted on each face was rapidly rotated by twirling a strings attached to it, was in 
its essence a loop in its most minimal form: two elements replacing one another in 
succession. In the Zootrope (1867)  and its numerous variations, approximately a 
dozen images were arranged around the perimeter of a circle.
 The Mutoscope, 
popular in America throughout the 1890s, increased the duration of the loop by 
placing a larger number of images radially on an axle.
Kinetoscope (1892-1896), the first modern cinematic machine to employ film, 
continued to arrange images in a loop.
approximately 20 second long presentation &mdash; a genre whose potential 
development was cut short when cinema adopted a much longer narrative form.    
 
 
From Animation to Cinema 
 
Once the cinema was stabilized as a technology, it cut all references to its origins 
in artifice. Everything which characterized moving pictures before the twentieth 
century &mdash; the manual construction of images, loop actions, the discrete nature of 
space and movement &mdash; all of this was delegated to cinema's bastard relative, its 
supplement, its shadow &mdash; animation. Twentieth century animation became a 
depository for nineteenth century moving image techniques left behind by 
cinema. 
   
culture of the moving image in the twentieth century. Animation foregrounds its 
artificial character, openly admitting that its images are mere representations. Its 
visual language is more aligned to the graphic than to the photographic. It is 

The opposition between the styles of animation and cinema defined the 

350

 50 feet of film translated to an 

348

349

 Even Edison's 

 

&#xC; 
253

352

In the 1990s, with the shift to computer media, these marginalized 

353

   

351

 Rear projection and blue screen photography, matte paintings and 

discrete and self-consciously discontinuous: crudely rendered characters moving 
against a stationary and detailed background; sparsely and irregularly sampled 
motion (in contrast to the uniform sampling of motion by a film camera &mdash; recall 
Jean-Luc Godard's definition of cinema as "truth 24 frames per second"), and 
finally space constructed from separate image layers. 
 
In contrast, cinema works hard to erase any traces of its own production 
process, including any indication that the images which we see could have been 
constructed rather than recorded. It denies that the reality it shows often does not 
exist outside of the film image, the image which was arrived at by photographing 
an already impossible space, itself put together with the use of models, mirrors, 
and matte paintings, and which was then combined with other images through 
optical printing. It pretends to be a simple recording of an already existing reality 
&mdash; both to a viewer and to itself.
 Cinema's public image stressed the aura of 
reality "captured" on film, thus implying that cinema was about photographing 
what existed before the camera, rather than "creating the 'never-was'" of special 
effects.
glass shots, mirrors and miniatures, push development, optical effects and other 
techniques which allowed filmmakers to construct and alter the moving images, 
and thus could reveal that cinema was not really different from animation, were 
pushed to cinema's periphery by its practitioners, historians and critics.
 
techniques moved to the center. 
         
 
Cinema Redefined  
 
A visible sign of this shift is the new role which computer generated special 
effects have come to play in Hollywood industry in the 1990s. Many blockbusters 
have been driven by special effects; feeding on their popularity. Hollywood has 
even created a new-mini genre of "The Making of..." videos and books which 
reveal how special effects are created.  
 
some of the possibilities of digital filmmaking. Until recently, Hollywood studios 
were the only ones who had the money to pay for digital tools and for the labor 
involved in producing digital effects. However, the shift to digital media affects 
not just Hollywood, but filmmaking as a whole. As traditional film technology is 
universally being replaced by digital technology, the logic of  the filmmaking 
process is being redefined. What I describe below are the new principles of digital 
filmmaking which are equally valid for individual or collective film productions, 
regardless of whether they are using the most expensive professional hardware 
and software or its amateur equivalents.       

I will use special effects from 1990s Hollywood films for illustrations of 

 

&#xC; 
254

Consider, then, the following principles of digital filmmaking:  

 
 
1.  Rather than filming physical reality it is now possible to generate film-like 

scenes directly in a computer with the help of 3D computer animation. 
Therefore, live action footage is displaced from its role as the only possible 
material from which the finished film is constructed.     

2.  Once live action footage is digitized (or directly recorded in a digital format), 
it loses its privileged indexical relationship to pro-filmic reality. The computer 
does not distinguish between an image obtained through the photographic 
lens, an image created in a paint program or an image synthesized in a 3D 
graphics package, since they are made from the same material &mdash; pixels. And 
pixels, regardless of their origin, can be easily altered, substituted one for 
another, and so on. Live action footage is reduced to be just another graphic, 
no different than images which were created manually.

354

   

3.  If live action footage was left intact in traditional filmmaking, now it 

functions as raw material for further compositing, animating and morphing. 
As a result, while retaining visual realism unique to the photographic process, 
film obtains the plasticity which was previously only possible in painting or 
animation. To use the suggestive title of a popular morphing software, digital 
filmmakers work with "elastic reality." For example, the opening shot of 
Forest Gump (Robert Zemeckis, Paramount Pictures, 1994; special effects by 
Industrial Light and Magic) tracks an unusually long and extremely intricate 
flight of a feather. To create the shot, the real feather was filmed against a 
blue background in different positions; this material was then animated and 
composited against shots of a landscape.
 The result: a new kind of realism, 
which can be described as "something which looks is intended to look exactly 
as if it could have happened, although it really could not."  

355

 

4.  Previously, editing and special effects were strictly separate activities. An 
editor worked on ordering sequences of images together; any intervention 
within an image was handled by special effects specialists. The computer 
collapses this distinction. The manipulation of individual images via a paint 
program or algorithmic image processing becomes as easy as arranging 
sequences of images in time. Both simply involve "cut and paste." As this 
basic computer command exemplifies, modification of digital images (or other 
digitized data) is not sensitive to distinctions of time and space or of 
differences of scale. So, re-ordering sequences of images in time, compositing 
them together in space, modifying parts of an individual image, and changing 
individual pixels become the same operation, conceptually and practically.   

 
Given the preceding principles, we can define digital film in this way:     

 
digital film = live action material + painting + image processing +    

 

&#xC; 
255

compositing + 2D computer animation + 3D computer animation  

356

 Painting, image processing and computer animation refer to the 

357

   

Let us summarize these principles. Live action footage is now only raw 

 
Live action material can either be recorded on film or video or directly in a digital 
format.
processes of modifying already existent images as well as creating new ones. In 
fact, the very distinction between creation and modification, so clear in film-based 
media (shooting versus darkroom processes in photography, production versus 
post-production in cinema) no longer applies to digital cinema, since each image, 
regardless of its origin, goes through a number of programs before making it to 
the final film.
 
material to be manipulated by hand: animated, combined with 3D computer 
generated scenes and painted over. The final images are constructed manually 
from different elements; and all the elements are either created entirely from 
scratch or modified by hand. Now we can finally answer the question "what is 
digital cinema?" Digital cinema is a particular case of animation which uses live 
action footage as one of its many elements.   
 
This can be re-read in view of the history of the moving image sketched 
earlier. Manual construction and animation of images gave birth to cinema and 
slipped into the margins...only to re-appear as the foundation of digital cinema. 
The history of the moving image thus makes a full circle. Born from animation, 
cinema pushed animation to its boundary, only to become one particular case of 
animation in the end.  
 
The relationship between "normal" filmmaking and special effects is 
similarly reversed. Special effects, which involved human intervention into 
machine recorded footage and which were therefore delegated to cinema's 
periphery throughout its history, become the norm of digital filmmaking. 
 
The same logic applies for the relationship between production and post-
production. Cinema traditionally involved arranging physical reality to be filmed 
though the use of sets, models, art direction, cinematography, etc. Occasional 
manipulation of recorded film (for instance, through optical printing) was 
negligible compared to the extensive manipulation of reality in front of a camera. 
In digital filmmaking, shot footage is no longer the final point but just raw 
material to be manipulated in a computer where the real construction of a scene 
will take place. In short, the production becomes just the first stage of post-
production. 
 
stages of the filmmaking process . Traditional on-set filming for Stars Wars: 
Episode 1 &mdash; The Phantom Menace (George Lucas, 1999) was done in just 65 
days. The post-production, however, stretched over two years, since ninety-five 

The following example illustrates this new relationship between different 

 

&#xC; 
256

358
  

359

      

360

Here are two more examples to further illustrate the shift from re-

The last example brings us to another conceptualization of digital cinema 

percent of the film (approximately 2,000 shots out of the total 2,200) was 
constructed on a computer.
 
arranging reality to re-arranging its images. From the analog era: for a scene in 
Zabriskie Point (1970), Michaelangelo Antonioni, trying to achieve a particularly 
saturated color, ordered a field of grass to be painted. From the digital era: to 
create the launch sequence in Apollo 13  (Universal Studious, 1995; special 
effects by Digital Domain), the crew shot footage at the original location of the 
launch at Cape Canaveral. The artists at Digital Domain scanned the film and 
altered it on computer workstations, removing recent building construction, 
adding grass to the launch pad and painting the skies to make them more 
dramatic. This altered film was then mapped onto 3D planes to create a virtual set 
which was animated to match a 180-degree dolly movement of a camera 
following a rising rocket.
  
&mdash; as painting. In his book-length study of digital photography, William J. 
Mitchell focuses our attention on what he calls the inherent mutability of a digital 
image: "The essential characteristic of digital information is that it can be 
manipulated easily and very rapidly by computer. It is simply a matter of 
substituting new digits for old... Computational tools for transforming, 
combining, altering, and analyzing images are as essential to the digital artist as 
brushes and pigments to a painter."
mutability erases the difference between a photograph and a painting. Since a film 
is a series of photographs, it is appropriate to extend Mitchell's argument to digital 
film. With an artist being able to easily manipulate digitized footage either as a 
whole or frame by frame, a film in a general sense becomes a series of 
paintings.
 
Hand-painting digitized film frames, made possible by a computer, is 
probably the most dramatic example of the new status of cinema. No longer 
strictly locked in the photographic, it opens itself towards the painterly. It is also 
the most obvious example of the return of cinema to its nineteenth century origins 
&mdash; in this case, to hand-crafted images of magic lantern slides, the 
Phenakistiscope, the Zootrope. 
We usually think of computerization as automation, but here the result is 
 
the reverse: what was previously automatically recorded by a camera now has to 
be painted one frame at a time. But not just a dozen images, as in the nineteenth 
century, but thousands and thousands. We can draw another parallel with the 
practice, common in the early days of silent cinema, of manually tinting film 
 Today, some of the 
frames in different colors according to a scene's mood.
most visually sophisticated digital effects are often achieved using the same 
simple method: painstakingly altering by hand thousands of frames. The frames 

 As Mitchell points out, this inherent 

361

  

362

 

&#xC; 
257

363

 In principle, given enough time and money, one can create 

The concept of digital cinema as painting can be also developed in a 

are painted over either to create mattes ("hand drawn matte extraction") or to 
directly change the images, as, for instance, in Forest Gump, where President 
Kennedy was made to speak new sentences by altering the shape of his lips, one 
frame at a time.
what will be the ultimate digital film: 90 minutes, i.e., 129600 frames completely 
painted by hand from scratch, but indistinguishable in appearance from live 
photography. 
 
different way. I would like to compare the shift from analog to digital filmmaking 
to the shift from fresco and tempera to oil painting in early Renaissance. A painter 
making fresco has limited time before the paint dries; and once it is dried, no 
further changes to the image are possible. Similarly, a traditional filmmaker has 
limited means to modify images once they are recorded on film. In the case of 
Medieval tempera painting, this can be compared to the practice of special effects 
during the analog period of cinema. A painter working with tempera could modify 
and re-work the image, but the process was quite painstaking and slow. Medieval 
and early Renaissance masters would spend up to six months on a painting a few 
inches tall. The switch to oils greatly liberated painters by allowing them to 
quickly create much larger compositions (think, for instance, of the works by 
Veronese and Tician) as well as to modify them as long as necessary. This change 
in painting technology led the Renaissance painters to create new kinds of 
compositions, new pictorial space and even narratives. Similarly, by allowing a 
filmmaker to treat a film image as an oil painting, digital technology redefines 
what can be done with cinema.  
 
extension of the cell animation techniques (since composited images are stacked 
in depth parallel to each other, as cells on a animation stand), the newer method of 
computer-based post-production, makes filmmaking a subset of animation in a 
different way. In this method the live action, photographic stills and/or graphic 
elements are positioned in a 3D virtual space. This gives the director the ability to 
freely move the virtual camera through this space, dolling and panning. Thus 
cinematography is subordinated to 3D computer animation. We may think of this 
method as an extension of multiplane animation camera. However, if the camera 
mounted over a multiplane stand could only move perpendicular to the images, 
now it can move in a arbitrary trajectory. The example of a commercial film 
which rely on this newer method which one day may become the standard of 
filmmaking (because it gives the director most flexibility) is Disney&rsquo;s Alladin; the 
example of an independent work which fully explores the new aesthetic 
possibilities of this method without subordinating it to the traditional cinematic 
realism is The Forest by Tamas Waliczky (1994).   

If digital compositing and digital painting can be thought of as an 

In discussing digital compositing in &ldquo;Compositing&rdquo; section I pointed out 
that it can be thought off as an intermediary step from 2D images to 3D computer 

 

&#xC; 
258

The reader who followed my analysis of the new possibilities of digital 

representation. The newer post-production method represents the next logical step 
towards %100 3D computer generated scenes. Instead of 2D space of &ldquo;traditional&rdquo; 
composite, we now have the layers of moving images positioned in a virtual 3D 
space.   
 
cinema may wonder why I have stressed the parallels between digital cinema and 
the pre-cinematic techniques of the nineteenth century but did not mention 
twentieth century avant-garde filmmaking. Did not the avant-garde filmmakers 
already explore many of these new possibilities? To take the notion of cinema as 
painting, Len Lye, one of the pioneers of abstract animation, was painting directly 
on film as early as 1935; he was followed by Norman McLaren and Stan 
Brackage, the later extensively covering shot footage with dots, scratches, 
splattered paint, smears and lines in an attempt to turn his films into equivalents 
of Abstract Expressionst painting. More generally, one of the major impulses in 
all of avant-garde filmmaking, from Leger to Godard, was to combine the 
cinematic, the painterly and the graphic &mdash; by using live action footage and 
animation within one film or even a single frame, by altering this footage in a 
variety of ways, or by juxtaposing printed texts and filmed images.  
 
 When the avant-garde filmmakers collaged multiple images within a 
single frame, or painted and scratched film, or revolted against the indexical 
identity of cinema in other ways, they were working against "normal" filmmaking 
procedures and the intended uses of film technology. (Film stock was not be 
designed to be painted on). Thus they operated on the periphery of commercial 
cinema not only aesthetically but also technically.  
 
strategies became embedded in the commands and interface metaphors of 
computer software.
 In short, the avant-garde became materialized in a 
computer. Digital cinema technology is a case in point. The avant-garde strategy 
of collage reemerged as a "cut and paste" command, the most basic operation one 
can perform on digital data. The idea of painting on film became embedded in 
paint functions of film editing software. The avant-garde move to combine 
animation, printed texts and live action footage is repeated in the convergence of 
animation, title generation, paint, compositing and editing systems into single all-
in-one packages. Finally, another move to combine a number of film images 
together within one frame (for instance, in Leger's 1924 Ballet Mechanique or in 
A Man with a Movie Camera) also become legitimized by technology, since all 
editing software, including Photoshop, Premiere, After Effects, Flame, and 
Cineon, by default assumes that a digital image consists of a number of separate 
image layers. All in all, what used to be exceptions for traditional cinema became 
the normal, intended techniques of digital filmmaking, embedded in technology 
design itself.
 

One general effect of the digital revolution is that avant-garde aesthetic 

364

365

 

 

&#xC; 
259

   

         

The mutability of digital data impairs the value of cinema recordings as a 

 
From Kino-Eye to Kino-Brush 
 
In the twentieth century, cinema has played two roles at once. As a media 
technology, cinema's role was to capture and to store visible reality. The difficulty 
of modifying images once they were recorded was exactly what gave cinema its 
value as a document, assuring its authenticity. The same rigidity of the film image 
has defined the limits of cinema as I defined it earlier, i.e. the super-genre  of live 
action narrative. Although it includes within itself  a variety of styles &mdash; the result 
of the efforts of many directors, designers and cinematographers &mdash; these styles 
share a strong family resemblance. They are all children of the recording process 
which uses lens, regular sampling of time and photographic media. They are all 
children of a machine vision.  
 
documents of reality. In retrospect, we can see that twentieth century cinema's 
regime of visual realism, the result of automatically recording visual reality, was 
only an exception, an isolated accident in the history of visual representation 
which has always involved, and now again involves the manual construction of 
images. Cinema becomes a particular branch of painting &mdash; painting in time. No 
longer a kino-eye, but a kino-brush.
 
cinema is one example of a larger trend: the return of pre-cinematic moving 
images techniques. Marginalized by the twentieth century institution of live action 
narrative cinema which relegated them to the realms of animation and special 
effects, these techniques reemerge as the foundation of digital filmmaking. What 
was supplemental to cinema becomes its norm; what was at its boundaries comes 
into the center. Computer media returns to us the repressed of the cinema. 
 
were closed off at the turn of the century when cinema came to dominate the 
modern moving image culture are now again beginning to be explored. Moving 
image culture is being redefined once again; the cinematic realism is being 
displaced from being its dominant mode to become only one option among many. 
 
 

The privileged role played by the manual construction of images in digital 

As the examples discussed in this section suggest, the directions which 

366

   

 

 

&#xC; 
260

 

New Language of Cinema 

 
 
Cinematic and Graphic: Cinegratography 
 
3D animation, compositing, mapping, paint retouching: in commercial cinema, 
these radical new techniques are mostly used to solve technical problems while 
traditional cinematic language is preserved unchanged. Frames are hand-painted 
to remove wires which supported an actor during shooting; a flock of birds is 
added to a landscape; a city street is filled with crowds of simulated extras. 
Although most Hollywood releases now involve digitally manipulated scenes, the 
use of computers is always carefully hidden.
Appropriately, in Hollywood the practice of simulating traditional film language 
received a name &ldquo;invisible effects,&rdquo; defined as &ldquo;computer-enchanced scenes that 
fool the audience into believing the sots were produced with live actors on 
location, but are really composed of a m&eacute;lange of digital and live action 
footage.&rdquo;

367

368

   

 

Commercial narrative cinema still continues to hold on to the classical 

realist style where images function as un-retouched photographic records of some 
events which took place in front of the camera. So when Hollywood cinema uses 
computers to create fantastic, impossible reality, this is done through the 
introduction of various non-human characters such as aliens, mutants and robots. 
We never notice the pure arbitrariness of their colorful and mutating bodies, of the 
beams of energy emulating from their eyes, of the whirlpools of particles 
emulating from their wings, because they are made perceptually consistent with 
the set, i.e. they look like something which could have existed in a three-
dimensional space and therefore could have been photographed.  

But how do filmmakers motivate turning familiar reality such as a human 

body or a landscape into something phsically impossible in our world? Such 
transformations are motivated by the movie&rsquo;s narrative. The shiny metallic body 
of Terminator in Terminator 2 is possible because the Terminator is a cyborg send 
from the future; the rubber-like body of Jim Carrey in The Mask (Russell, 1994) 
is possible because his character wears a mask with magical powers. Similarly, in 
What Dreams May Come (PolyGram Filmed Entertainment, Ward, special effects 
by Mass.Illusions and others, 1998) the fantastic landscape made of swirling 
brushstrokes where the main hero is transported after his death is motivated by the 
unique status of this location.  

While embracing computers as a productivity tool, cinema refuses to give 
up its unique cinema-effect, an effect which, according to film theorist Christian 
Metz's penetrating analysis made in the 1970s, depends upon narrative form, the 

 

&#xC; 
261

369

 

What are these forms? First of all, there is the music video. Probably not 

reality effect and cinema's architectural arrangement all working together.
Towards the end of his essay, Metz wonders whether in the future non-narrative 
films may become more numerous; if this happens, he suggests that cinema will 
no longer need to manufacture its reality effect. Electronic and digital media have 
already brought about this transformation. Beginning in the 1980s, new cinematic 
forms have emerged which are not linear narratives, which are exhibited on a 
television or a computer screen, rather than in a movie theater &mdash; and which 
simultaneously give up cinematic realism. 
 
by accident, the genre of music video came into existence exactly at the time 
when electronic video effects devices were entering editing studios. Importantly, 
just as music videos often incorporate narratives within them, but are not linear 
narratives from start to finish, they rely on film (or video) images, but change 
them beyond the norms of traditional cinematic realism. The manipulation of 
images through hand-painting and image processing, hidden in Hollywood 
cinema, is brought into the open on a television screen. Similarly, the construction 
of an image from heterogeneous sources is not subordinated to the goal of 
photorealism but functions as a aesthetic strategy. The genre of music video has 
been a laboratory for exploring numerous new possibilities of manipulating 
photographic images made possible by computers &mdash; the numerous points which 
exist in the space between the 2D and the 3D, cinematography and painting, 
photographic realism and collage. In short, it is a living and constantly expanding 
textbook for digital cinema. 
 
generally, broadcast graphics in the electronic age) deserves a separate treatment 
and I will not try to take it up here. Instead, I will discuss another new cinematic 
non-narrative form, CD-ROM-based games, which, in contrast to music video, 
relied on the computer for storage and distribution from the very beginning. And, 
unlike music video designers who were consciously pushing traditional film or 
video images into something new, the designers of CD-ROMs arrived at a new 
visual language unintentionally while attempting to emulate traditional cinema.      
 
 
multimedia; and in 1991 it released QuickTime software to enable an ordinary 
personal computer to play movies. However, for the next few years the computer 
did not perform its new role very well. First, CD-ROMs could not hold anything 
close to the length of a standard theatrical film. Secondly, the computer would not 
smoothly play a movie larger than the size of a stamp. Finally, the movies had to 
be compressed, degrading their visual appearance. Only in the case of still images 
was the computer able to display photographic-like detail at full screen size.     
 
ROMs had to invent a different kind of cinematic language in which a range of 

 
In the late 1980s, Apple began to promote the concept of computer 

 A detailed analysis of the evolution of music video imagery (or, more 

Because of these particular hardware limitations, the designers of CD-

 

&#xC; 
262

The graphic also met the cinematic. The designers of CD-ROMs were 

370

strategies, such as discrete motion, loops, and superimposition, previously used in 
nineteenth century moving image presentations, in twentieth century animation, 
and in the avant-garde tradition of graphic cinema, were applied to photographic 
or synthetic images. This language synthesized cinematic illusionism and the 
aesthetics of graphic collage, with its characteristic heterogeneity and 
discontinuity. The photographic and the graphic, divorced when cinema and 
animation went their separate ways, met again on a computer screen. 
 
aware of the techniques of twentieth century cinematography and film editing, but 
they had to adopt these techniques both to an interactive format and to hardware 
limitations. As a result, the techniques of modern cinema and of nineteenth 
century moving image have merged in a new hybrid language which can be called 
&ldquo;cinegratography.&rdquo;.   
 
We can trace the development of this language by analyzing a few well-
known CD-ROM titles. The best selling game Myst (Broderbund, 1993) unfolds 
its narrative strictly through still images, a practice which takes us back to magic 
lantern shows (and to Chris Marker's La Jet&eacute;e).
 But in other ways Myst relies 
on the techniques of twentieth century cinema. For instance, the CD-ROM uses 
simulated camera turns to switch from one image to the next. It also employs the 
basic technique of film editing to subjectively speed up or slow down time. In the 
course of the game, the user moves around a fictional island by clicking on a 
mouse. Each click advances a virtual camera forward, revealing a new view of a 
3D environment. When the user begins to descend into the underground 
chambers, the spatial distance between the points of view of each two consecutive 
views sharply decreases. If before the user was able to cross a whole island with 
just a few clicks, now it takes a dozen clicks to get to the bottom of the stairs! In 
other words, just as in traditional cinema, Myst slows down time to create 
suspense and tension. 
In Myst, miniature animations are sometimes embedded within the still 
 
images. In the next best-selling CD-ROM 7th Guest (Virgin Games, 1993), the 
user is presented with video clips of live actors superimposed over static 
backgrounds created with 3D computer graphics. The clips are looped, and the 
moving human figures clearly stand out against the backgrounds. Both of these 
features connect the visual language of 7th Guest to nineteenth century pro-
cinematic devices and twentieth century cartoons rather than to cinematic 
verisimilitude. But like Myst, 7th Guest also evokes distinctly modern cinematic 
codes. The environment where all action takes place (an interior of a house) is 
rendered using a wide angle lens; to move from one view to the next a camera 
follows a complex curve, as though mounted on a virtual dolly.           
 
Produced to complement the fiction film of the same title, marketed not as a 
"game" but as an "interactive movie," and featuring full screen video throughout, 

Next, consider the CD-ROM Johnny Mnemonic (Sony Imagesoft, 1995). 

 

&#xC; 
263

It would be not entirely inappropriate to read this short history of the 

it comes closer to cinematic realism than the previous CD-ROMs &mdash; yet it is still 
quite distinct from it. With all action shot against a green screen and then 
composited with graphic backgrounds, its visual style exists within a space 
between cinema and collage. 
 
digital moving image as a teleological development which replays the emergence 
of cinema a hundred years earlier. Indeed, as computers' speed keeps increasing, 
the CD-ROM designers have been able to go from a slide show format to the 
superimposition of small moving elements over static backgrounds and finally to 
full-frame moving images. This evolution repeats the nineteenth century 
progression: from sequences of still images (magic lantern slides presentations) to 
moving characters over static backgrounds (for instance, in Reynaud's 
Praxinoscope Theater) to full motion (the Lumieres' cinematograph). Moreover, 
the introduction of QuickTime in 1991 can be compared to the introduction of the 
Kinetoscope in 1892: both were used to present short loops, both featured the 
images approximately two by three inches in size, both called for private viewing 
rather than collective exhibition. The two technologies appear to play the similar 
cultural role. If in the early 1890s the public patronized Kinetoscope parlors 
where peep-hole machines presented them with the latest marvel &mdash; tiny moving 
photographs arranged in short loops; exactly  a hundred years later, computer 
users were equally fascinated with tiny QuickTime Movies which turned a 
computer in a film projector, however imperfect.
film screenings of 1895 which shocked their audiences with huge moving images 
found their parallel in 1995 CD-ROM titles where the moving image finally fills 
the entire computer screen (for instance, in Jonny Mnemonic.) Thus, exactly a 
hundred years after cinema was officially "born," it was reinvented on a computer 
screen.  
 
as a linear march towards only one possible language, or as a progression towards 
more and more accurate verisimilitude. Rather, we have come to see its history as 
a succession of distinct and equally expressive languages, each with its own 
aesthetic variables, each new language closing off some of the possibilities of the 
previous one &mdash; a cultural logic not dissimilar to Kuhn's analysis of scientific 
paradigms.
multimedia titles as a result of technological limitations, we may want to think of 
them as an alternative to traditional cinematic illusionism, as a beginning of 
digital cinema's new language.         
 
For the computer / entertainment industries, these strategies represent only 
a temporary limitation, an annoying drawback that needs to be overcome. This is 
one important difference between the situation at the end of the nineteenth and the 
end of the twentieth centuries: if cinema was developing towards the still open 
horizon of many possibilities, the development of commercial multimedia, and of 

But this is only one reading. We no longer think of the history of cinema 

371

 Finally, the Lumieres' first 

372

 Similarly, instead of dismissing visual strategies of early 

 

&#xC; 
264

corresponding computer hardware (compression boards, storage formats such as 
DVD), is driven by a clearly defined goal: the exact duplication of cinematic 
realism. So if a computer screen, more and more, emulates cinema's screen, this 
not an accident but a result of conscious planning by the computer and 
entertainment industry. But this drive to turn new media into a simulation of  
classical film language, which paralles the encoding of cinema&rsquo;s techniques in 
software interfaces and hardare itself, described in &ldquo;Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; section,  
is just one direction for new media dvelopment among numerous others. I will 
next examine a number of new media and old media objects which point towards 
other possible trajectories.  
 
 
New Temporality: Loop as a Narrative Engine 
  
One of the underlying assumptions of this book is that by looking at the history of 
visual culture and media, and in particular cinema, we can find many strategies 
and techniques relevant to new media design. Put differently, in order to develop 
new aesthetics of new media we should pay as much attention to the cultural 
history as to computer&rsquo;s new unique possibilities to generate, organize, 
manipulate and distribute data.   
 
media up until the time of research), three kinds of situations will be particularly 
relevant for us: 
  

As we scan through cultural history (which includes the history of new 

&bull;  when an earlier interesting strategy or technique was abandoned or 
forced into &ldquo;underground&rdquo; without fully developing its potential;  

&bull;  when an earlier strategy can be understood as a response to the 
technological constrains (I am using this more technical term on 
purpose instead of more ideologically loaded &ldquo;limitations&rdquo;)  similar to 
the constrains of new media;  

&bull;  when an earlier strategy was used in a situation similar to a particular 
situation faced by new media designers. For instance, montage was a 
strategy to deal with modularity of a film (how do you join separate 
shots?) as well as with a problem of coordinating diffirent media types 
such as images and sound. Both of these simutaions are being faced 
once again today by new media designers. 

 
I already used these principles in discussing the parallels between nineteenth 
century pro-cinematic techniques and the language of new media; they also 
guided me in thinking about animation (the &ldquo;underground&rdquo; of 20th century 
cinema) as the basis for digital cinema new language. I will now use a particular 
parallel between early cinematic and new media technology to highlight another 

 

&#xC; 
265

373

 

Cinema's birth from a loop form was reenacted at least once during its 

As already mentioned in the previous section, all nineteenth century pro-

older technique useful to new media: a loop. Characterically, many new media 
products, be it cultural objects (such as games) or software (various media players 
such as QuickTime Player) use loops in their design while treating them as 
temporary technological limitations. I, however, want to think about it as a source 
of new possibilities for new media.
 
cinematic devices, up to Edison's Kinetoscope, were based on short loops. As "the 
seventh art" began to mature, it banished the loop to the low-art realms of the 
instructional film, the pornographic peep-show and the animated cartoon. In 
contrast, narrative cinema has avoided repetitions; as modern Western fictional 
forms in general, it put forward a notion of human existence as a linear 
progression through numerous unique events. 
 
history. In one of the sequences of  A Man with a Movie Camera, Vertov shows 
us a cameraman standing in the back of a moving automobile. As he is being 
carried forward by an automobile, he cranks the handle of his camera. A loop, a 
repetition, created by the circular movement of the handle, gives birth to a 
progression of events &mdash; a very basic narrative which is also quintessentially 
modern: a camera moving through space recording whatever is in its way. In what 
seems to be a reference to cinema's primal scene, these shots are intercut with the 
shots of a moving train. Vertov even re-stages the terror which Lumieres's film 
supposedly provoked in its audience; he positions his camera right along the train 
track so the train runs over our point of view a number of times, crushing us again 
and again.  
 
Early digital movies shared the same limitations of storage as nineteenth 
century pro-cinematic devices. This is probably why the loop playback function 
was built into QuickTime interface, thus giving it the same weight as the VCR-
style "play forward" function. So, in contrast to films and videotapes, QuickTime 
movies were supposed to be played forward, backward or looped. Computer 
games also heavily relied on loops. Since it was not possible to animate in real 
time every character, the designers stored short loops of character&rsquo;s motion &mdash; for 
instance, an enemy soldier or a monster walking back and forth &mdash; which would 
be recalled at the appropriate times in the game. Internet pornography also heavily 
relied on loops. Many sites featured numerous &ldquo;channels&rdquo; which were supposed 
to stream either feature length feature films or &ldquo;live feeds&rdquo;; in reality they would 
usually play short loops (a minute or so) over and over. Sometimes a few films 
will be cut into a number of short loops which would become the content of 100, 
500 or 1000 channels.

374

   

The history of new media tells us that the hardware limitations never go 
away: they disappear in one area only to come back in another. One example of 
this which I already noted is the hardware limitations of the 1980s in the area of 
3D computer animation.  In the 1990s they returned in the new area: Internet-

 

&#xC; 
266

based real-time virtual worlds. What used to be the slow speed of CPUs became 
the slow bandwidth. As a result the 1990s VRML worlds look like the pre-
rendered animations done ten years earlier.  

The similar logic applies to loops. Earlier QuickTime movies and 

375

 Similarly, we may expect that when digital 

computer games heavily relied on loops. As the CPU speed increased and larger 
storage media such as CD-ROM and DVD became available, the use of loops in 
stand-alone hypermedia declined. However, online virtual worlds such as Active 
Worlds came to use loops extensively, as it provides a cheap (in terms of 
bandwidth and computation) way of adding some signs of &ldquo;life&rdquo; to their 
geometric-looking environments.
videos will appear on small displays in our cellular phones, personal managers 
such as Palm Pilot or other wireless communication devices, they will once again 
will be arranged in short loops because of bandwidth, storage, or CPU limitations.    
Can the loop be a new narrative form appropriate for the computer 
 
age?
 It is relevant to recall that the loop gave birth not only to cinema but also 
to computer programming. Programming involves altering the linear flow of data 
through control structures, such as "if/then" and "repeat/while"; the loop is the 
most elementary of these control structures. Most computer programs are based 
on repetitions of a set number of steps; this repetition is controlled by the 
program&rsquo;s main loop. So if we strip the computer from its usual interface and 
follow the execution of a typical computer program, the computer will reveal 
itself to be another version of Ford's factory, with a loop as its conveyer belt. 
As the practice of computer programming illustrates, the loop and the 

376

377

Traditional cell animation similarly combines a narrative and a loop. In 

sequential progression do not have to be thought as being mutually exclusive. A 
computer program progresses from start to end by executing a series of loops. 
Another illustration of how these two temporal forms can work together is 
 In this house a 
M&ouml;bius House by Dutch team UN Studio/Van Berkel & Bos.
number of functionally different areas are arranged one after another in the form 
of a M&ouml;bius strip, thus forming a loop. As the narrative of the day progresses 
from one activity to the next, the inhabitants move from area to area.  
 
order to save labor, animators arrange many actions, such as movements of 
characters&rsquo; legs, eyes and arms, into short loops and repeat them over and over. 
Thus, as already discussed in the previous section, in a typical twentieth century 
cartoon a large proportion of motions involves loops. This principle is taken to the 
extreme in Rybczynski&rsquo;s Tango. Subjecting live action footage to the logic of 
animation, Rybczynski arranges the trajectory of every character through space as 
a loop. These loops are further composited together resulting in a complex and 
intricate time-based structure. At the same time, the overall &ldquo;shape&rdquo; of this 
structure is governed by a number of narratives. The film begins in an empty 
room; next the loops of character&rsquo;s trajectories through this room are added, one 

 

&#xC; 
267

by one. The end of the film mirrors its beginning as the loops are &ldquo;deleted&rdquo; in a 
reverse order, also one by one. This metaphor for a progression of a human life 
(we are born alone, gradually forms relations with other humans, and eventually 
die alone) is also supported by another narrative: the first character to appear in 
the room is a young boy, the last one is an old woman.   

The concept of a loop as an &ldquo;engine&rdquo; which puts the narrative in motion 
becomes a foundation of a brilliant interactive TV program Akvaario (aquarium) 
by a number of graduate students at Helsinki&rsquo;s University of Art and Design 
 In contrast to many 
(Professor and Media Lab coordinator: Minna Tarrka).
new media objects which combine the conventions of cinema, print and HCI, 
Akvaario aims to preserve the continuos flow of traditional cinema, while adding 
interactivity to it. Along with an earlier game Jonny Mnemonic (SONY, 1995), as 
well as the pioneering interactive laserdisk computer installations by Graham 
Weinbren done in the 1980s, this project is a rare example of a new media 
narrative which does not rely on the oscillation between non-interactive and 
interactive segments (see &ldquo;Illusion, Narrative and Interactivity&rdquo; section for the 
analysis of this temporal ossicilation.) 

378

Using the already familiar convention of such games such as Tamagotchi 

379

 Most shots which we see show this character engaged in different 

(1996-), the program asks TV viewers to &ldquo;take charge&rdquo; of a fictional human 
character.
activities in his apartment: eating dinner, reading a book, starring into space. The 
shots replace each other following standard conventions of film and TV editing. 
The result is something which looks at first like a conventional, although very 
long, movie (the program was projected to run for three hours every day over the 
course of a few months), even though the shots are selected in real time by a 
computer porgram from a database of a few hundreds diffirent shots.  

By choosing one of the four buttons which are always present on the 

bottom of the screen, the viewers control character&rsquo;s motivation. When a button is 
pressed, a computer program selects a sequence of particular shots to follow the 
shot which plays currently. Because of visual, spatial and referential discontinuity 
between shots typical of standard editing, the result is something which the 
viewer interprets as a conventional narrative. A film or television viewer viewer 
does not expect that any two shots which follow one another have to display the 
same space or subsequent moments of time. Therefore in Akvaario a computer 
program can &ldquo;weave&rdquo; an endless narrative by choosing from a database of 
different shots. What gives the resulting &ldquo;narrative: a suficient continuity is that 
almost all shots show the same character.  

Akvaario is one of the first examples of what in previous chapter I called a 

&ldquo;database narrative.&rdquo; It is, in other words, a narrative which fully utilizes many 
features of database organization of data. It relies on our abilities to classify 
database records according to different dimensions, to sort through records, to 

 

&#xC; 
268

In Akvaario the loop becomes the way to bridge linear narrative and 

quickly retrieve any record, as well as to &ldquo;stream&rdquo; a number of different records 
continuously one after another. 
 
interactive control. When the program begins, a few shots keep following each 
other in a loop. After users choose character&rsquo;s motivation by pressing a button, 
this loop becomes a narrative. Shots stop repeating and a sequence of new shots is 
displayed. If no button pressed again, the narrative turns back into a loop, i.e. a 
few shots start repeating over and over. In Akvaario a narrative is born from a 
loop and it returns back to a loop. The historical birth of modern fictional cinema 
out of the loop returns as a condition of cinema&rsquo;s rebirth as an interactive form. 
Rather than being an archaic leftover, a reject from cinema&rsquo;s evolution, the use of 
loop in Akvaario suggests a new temporal aesthetics for computer-based cinema. 
 
Jean-Louis Boissier's Flora petrinsularis realizes some of the possibilities 
contained in the loop form in a diffirent way.
Rousseau's Confessions. It opens with a white screen, containing a numbered list. 
Clicking on each item leads us to a screen containing two windows, positioned 
side by side. Both windows show the same video loop made from a few diffirent 
shots. The two loops are offset from each other in time. Thus, the images 
appearing in the left window reappear in a moment on the right and vice versa, as 
though an invisible wave is running through the screen. This wave soon becomes 
materialized: when we click inside the windows we are taken to a new screen 
which also contains two windows, each showing loop of a rhythmically vibrating 
water surface. The loops of water surfaces can be thought of as two sign waves 
offset in phase. This structure, then, functions as a &ldquo;meta-text&rdquo; of a structure in 
the first screen. In other words, the loops of water surface act as a diagram of the 
loop structure which controls the correlations between shots in the first screen, 
similar to how Marey and the Gibsons diagrammed human motion in their film 
studies in the beginning of the twentieth century.  

 This CD-ROM is based on 

380

As each mouse click reveals another loop, the viewer becomes an editor, 

but not in a traditional sense. Rather than constructing a singular narrative 
sequence and discarding material which is not used, here the viewer brings to the 
forefront, one by one, numerous layers of looped actions which seem to be taking 
place all at once, a multitude of separate but co-existing temporalities. The viewer 
is not cutting but re-shuffling. In a reversal of Vertov's sequence where a loop 
generated a narrative, viewer's attempt to create a story in Flora petrinsularis leads 
to a loop. 

It is useful to analyze the loop structure of Flora petrinsularis using 

montage theory. From this perspective, the repetition of images in two adjoint 
windows can be interpreted as an example of what Eisenstein called rhythmical 
montage. At the same time, Boissier takes montage apart, so to speak. The shots 
which in traditional temporal montage would follow each in time here appear next 
to each other in space. In addition, rather than being &ldquo;hard-wired&rdquo; by an editor in 

 

&#xC; 
269

The loop which structures Flora petrinsularis on a number of levels 

381

At the same time, it is possible to find more traditional temporal montage 

only one possible structure, here the shots can appear in different combinations 
since they are activated by a user moving a mouse across the windows.  
 
in this work as well &mdash; for instance, the move from first screen which shows 
close-up of a woman to a second screen which shows water surfaces and back to 
the first screen. This move can be interpreted as a traditional parallel editing. In 
cinema parallel editing involves alternating between two subjects. For instance, a 
chase sequence may go back and forth between the images of two cars, one 
pursuing another. However in our case the water images are always present 
&ldquo;underneath&rdquo; the first set of images. So the logic here is again one of co-existence 
rather than that of replacement, typical of cinema (see my discussion of spatial 
montage below). 
 
becomes a metaphor for human desire which can never achieve resolution. It can 
be also read as a comment on cinematic realism. What are the minimal conditions 
necessary to create the impression of reality? As Boissier demonstrates, in the 
case of a field of grass, a close-up of a plant or a stream, just a few looped frames 
become sufficient to produce the illusion of life and of linear time.  
 
Steven Neale describes how early film demonstrated its authenticity by 
representing moving nature: "What was lacking [in photographs] was the wind, 
the very index of real, natural movement. Hence the obsessive contemporary 
fascination, not just with movement, not just with scale, but also with waves and 
sea spray, with smoke and spray."
 What for early cinema was its biggest pride 
and achievement &mdash; a faithful documentation of nature's movement &mdash; becomes 
for Boissier a subject of ironic and melancholic simulation. As the few frames are 
looped over and over, we see blades of grades shifting slightly back and forth, 
rhythmically responding to the blow of non-existent wind which is almost 
approximated by the noise of a computer reading data from a CD-ROM.  
 
As you watch the CD-ROM, the computer periodically staggers, unable to 
maintain consistent data rate. As a result, the images on the screen move in 
uneven bursts, slowing and speeding up with human-like irregularity. It is as 
though they are brought to life not by a digital machine but by a human operator, 
cranking the handle of the Zootrope a century and a half ago...  
 
 
Spatial Montage  
 
Along with taking on a loop, Flora petrinsularis can also be seen as a step towards 
what I will call a spatial montage. Instead of a traditional singular frame of 
cinema, Boissier uses two images at once, positioned side by side. This can be 
thought of a simplest case of a spatial montage. In general, spatial montage would 

Something else is being simulated here as well, perhaps unintentionally. 

 

 

&#xC; 
270

 

Spatial montage represents an alternative to traditional cinematic temporal 

involve a number of images, potentially of different sizes and proportions, 
appearing on the screen at the same time. This by itself of course does not result 
in montage; it up to the filmmaker to construct a logic which drives which images 
appear together, when they appear and what kind of relationships they enter with 
each other.  
 
montage, replacing its traditional sequential mode with a spatial one. Ford's 
assembly line relied on the separation of the production process into a set of 
repetitive, sequential, and simple activities. The same principle made computer 
programming possible: a computer program breaks a tasks into a series of 
elemental operations to be executed one at a time. Cinema followed this logic of 
industrial production as well. It replaced all other modes of narration with a 
sequential narrative, an assembly line of shots which appear on the screen one at a 
time. A sequential narrative turned out to be particularly incompatible with a 
spatial narrative which played a prominent role in European visual culture for 
centuries. From Giotto's fresco cycle at Capella degli Scrovegni in Padua to 
Courbet's A Burial at Ornans, artists presented a multitude of separate events 
within a single space, be it the fictional space of a painting or the physical space 
which can be taken by the viewer all in once. In the case of Giotto&rsquo;s fresco cycle 
and many other fresco and icon cycles, each narrative event is framed separately 
but all of them can be viewed together in a single glance. In other cases, different 
events are represented as taking place within a single pictorial space. Sometimes, 
events which formed one narrative but they separated by time were depicted 
within a single painting. More often, the painting&rsquo;s subject became an excuse to 
show a number of separate &ldquo;micro-narratives&rdquo; (for instance, works by 
Hi&euml;ronymous Bosch and Peter Bruegel). All in all, in contrast to cinema's 
sequential narrative, in spatial narrative all the "shots" were accessible to a viewer 
at one. Like nineteenth century animation, spatial narrative did not disappear 
completely in the 20th century; but just as animation, it came to be delegated to a 
minor form of Western culture &mdash; comics.  

It is not accidental that the marginalization of spatial narrative and the 
privileging of sequential mode of narration coincided with the rise of historical 
paradigm in human sciences. Cultural geographer Edward Soja has argued that 
the rise of history in the second half of the nineteenth century coincided with the 
decline in spatial imagination and the spatial mode of social analysis.
According to Soja, it is only in the last decades of the twentieth century that this 
mode made a powerful comeback, as exemplified by the growing importance of 
such concepts as &ldquo;geopolitics&rdquo; and &ldquo;globalisation&rdquo; as well as by the key role 
analysis of space played in theories of post-modernism. Indeed, although some of 
the best thinkers of the twentieth century such as Freud, Panofsky and Foucault 
were able to combine historical and spatial mode of analysis in their theories, they 
probably represent an exemption rather than the norm. The same holds for film 

382

 

&#xC; 
271

Twentieth century film practice has elaborated complex techniques of 

theory, which, from Eisenstein in the 1920s to Deleuse in the 1980s, focused on 
temporal rather than spatial structures of film.  
 
montage between different images replacing each other in time; but the possibility 
of what can be called "spatial montage" between simultaneously co-exiting 
images was not explored as systematically. (Thus cinema also given to historical 
imagination at the expense of spatial one.) The notable exemptions include the 
use of split screen by Hans Abel in Napol&eacute;on in the 1920s and also by the 
American experimental filmmaker Stan Van der Beek in the 1960s; also some 
other works, or rather, events, of the 1960s &ldquo;expanded cinema&rdquo; movement, and, 
last but not least, the legendary multi-image multimedia presentation shown in the 
Chech Pavilion at the1967 World Expo. Emil Radok&rsquo;s Diaolyektan consisted 
from 112 separate cubes. One hundred and sixty different images could be 
projected onto each cube. Radok was able to &ldquo;direct&rdquo; each cube separately. To the 
best of my knowledge, since this project nobody tried again to create a spatial 
montage of this complexity in any technology.  

Traditional film and video technology were designed to completely fill a 

screen with a single image; thus to explore spatial montage a filmmaker had to 
work &ldquo;against&rdquo; the technology. This in part explains why so few tried to do this. 
But when, in the 1970s, the screen became a bit-mapped computer display, with 
individual pixels corresponding to memory locations which can be dynamically 
updated by a computer program, one image/ one screen logic was broken. Since 
the Xerox Park Alto workstation, GUI used multiple windows. It would be logical 
to expect that cultural forms based on moving images will eventually adopt 
similar conventions. In the 1990s some computer games such as Golden Eye 
(Nintendo/Rare, 1997) already used multiple windows to present the same action 
simultaneously from different viewpoints. We may expect that computer-based 
cinema will eventually have to follow the same direction &mdash; especially when the 
limitations of communication bandwidth will disappear, while the resolution of 
displays will significantly increase, from the typical 1-2K in 2000 to 4K, 8K or 
beyond. I believe that the next generation of cinema &mdash; broadband cinema &mdash; will 
add multiple windows to its language. When this happen, the tradition of spatial 
narrative which twentieth century cinema suppressed will re-emerge one again.  

Looking back at visual culture and art of the previous centuries gives 

many ideas for how spatial narrative can be further developed in a computer; but 
what about spatial montage? In other words, what will happen if we combine two 
different cultural traditions: informationally dense visual narratives of 
Renaissance and Baroque painters with &ldquo;attention demanding&rdquo; shot juxtapositions 
of twentieth century film directors? "My boyfriend came back from war!," a Web-
based work by the young Moscow artist  Olga Lialina, can be read as an 
exploration of this direction.
 Using the capability of HTML to create frames 
within frames, Lialina leads us through a narrative which begins with an single 

383

 

&#xC; 
272

The logic of replacement, characteristic of cinema, gives way to the logic 

screen. This screen becomes progressively divided into more and more frames as 
we follow different links. Throughout, an image of a human couple and of a 
constantly blinking window remain on the left part of screen. These two images 
enter into new combinations with texts and images on the right part which keep 
changing as the user interacts with the work. As the narrative activates different 
parts of the screen, montage in time gives way to montage in space. Put 
differently, we can say that montage acquires a new spatial dimension. In addition 
to montage dimensions already explored by cinema (differences in images' 
content, composition, movement) we now have a new dimension: the position of 
the images in space in relation to each other. In addition, as images do not replace 
each other (as in cinema) but remain on the screen throughout the movie, each 
new image is juxtaposed not just with one image which preceded it, but with all 
the other images present on the screen.    
 
of addition and co-existence. Time becomes spatialized, distributed over the 
surface of the screen. In spatial montage, nothing is potentially forgotten, nothing 
is erased. Just as we use computers to accumulate endless texts, messages, notes 
and data, and just as a person, going through life, accumulates more and more 
memories, with the past slowly acquiring more weight than the future, spatial 
montage can accumulate events and images as it progresses through its narrative. 
In contrast to cinema's screen, which primarily functioned as a record of 
perception, here computer screen functions as a record of memory. 
 
appropriate for the user experience of muli-tasking and multiple windows of GUI. 
In the text of his lecture &#x93;&ldquo;Of other spaces&#x94;&rdquo; Michel Foucault writes: &#x93;&ldquo;We are now 
in the epoch of simultaneity: we are in epoch of juxtaposition, the epoch of near 
and far, of the side-by-side, of the dispersed&#x85;&hellip;our experience of the world is less 
of a long life developing through time that that of a network that connects points 
and intersects with its own skein&#x85;&hellip;&#x94;&rdquo;384 Writing this in the early 1970s, Foucault 
appears to prefigure not only the network society, exemplified by the Internet (&#x93;&ldquo;a 
network which connects points&#x94;&rdquo;) but also GUI (&#x93;&ldquo;epoch of simultaneity&#x85;&hellip;of the 
side-by-side). GUI allows the users to run a number of software applications at 
the same time; and it uses the convention of multiple overlapping windows to 
present both data and controls. The construct of  the desktop with presents the 
user with multiple icons which are all simultaneously and continuously &#x93;&ldquo;active&#x94;&rdquo; 
(since they all can be clicked at any time) follows the same logic of 
&#x93;&ldquo;simultaneity&#x94;&rdquo; and of &#x93;&ldquo;side-by-side.&#x94;&rdquo; On the level of computer programming, this 
logic corresponds to object-oriented programming. Instead of a single program 
which, like Ford&#x92;&rsquo;s assembly line, is executed one statement at a time, in object-
oriented paradigm a number of objects send messages to each other. These objects 
are all active simultaneously. Object-oriented paradigm and multiple windows of 
GUI work together; object-oriented approach was in fact used to program the 

As I already noted, spatial montage can also be seen as an aesthetics 

 

&#xC; 
273

original Macintosh GUI which substituted the &#x93;&ldquo;one command at a time&#x94;&rdquo; logic of 
DOS with the logic of simultaneity of multiple windows and icons.   

The spatial montage of "My boyfriend came back from war!" follows this 

logic of simultaneity of modern GUI. Multiple and simultaneously active icons 
and windows of GUI become the multiple and simultaneously active frames and 
hyperlinks of this Web artwork. Just as the GUI user can click on any icon at any 
time, changing the overall &ldquo;state&rdquo; of the computer environment, the user of 
Lialina&rsquo;s site can activate different hyperlinks which are all simultaneously 
present. Each action either changes the contents of a single frame or creates new 
frame(s). In either case, the &ldquo;state&rdquo; of the screen as a whole is affected. The result 
is a new cinema where syncronic dimension is no longer  privileged to the 
diacronic dimension, space is no longer privileged to time, the simultaneity is no 
longer privileged to sequence, montage within a shot is no longer privileged to 
montage in time. 
 
 
Cinema as an Information Space 
 
As we saw in &ldquo;Cultural Interfaces&rdquo; section, cinema language which originally was 
an interface to narrative taking place in 3D space is now becoming an interface to 
all types of computer data and media. I discussed how such elements of this 
language as rectangular framing, mobile camera, image transitions, montage in 
time and montage within an image reappear in general purpose HCI, in interfaces 
of software applications and in cultural interfaces.  
 
is to interpret the later as information space. If HCI is an interface  to computer 
data, and a book is interface to text, cinema can be thought of an interface to 
events taking place in 3D space. Just as painting before it, cinema presented us 
with familiar images of visible reality &mdash; interiors, landscapes, human characters 
&mdash; arranged within a rectangular frame. The aesthetics of these arrangements 
ranges from extreme scarcity to extreme density. The examples of the former are 
paintings by Morandi and shots in Late Spring (Yasujiro Ozu, 1949); the 
examples of the later are paintings by Bosch and Bruegel (and much of Northern 
Renaissance painting in general), and many shots in  A Man with a Movie 
Camera.
 It would be only a small leap to relate this density of &ldquo;pictorial 
displays&rdquo; to the density of contemporary information displays such as Web 
portals which may contain a few dozen hyperlinked elements; or the interfaces of 
popular software packages which similarly present the user with dozens 
commands at once. Can the contemporary information designers learn from 
information displays of the past &mdash; particular films, paintings and other visual 
forms which follow the aesthetics of density?   

Yet another way to think about new media interfaces in relation to cinema 

385

  

 

&#xC; 
274

In making such a connection I rely on work of art historian Svetlana 
 
Alpers who claimed that in contrast to Italian Renaissance painting primarily 
concerned with narration, Dutch painting of the Seventeenth century is focused on 
description.386 While the Italians subordinated details to the narrative action, 
creating clear hierarchy of viewer&#x92;&rsquo;s attention, in Dutch paintings particular details 
and, consequently, viewer&#x92;&rsquo;s attention, are more evenly distributed throughout the 
whole image. While functioning as a window into an illusionary space, the Dutch 
painting also is a loving catalog of numerous objects, different material surfaces 
and light effects painted in minute detail (works by Vermeer, for instance.) The 
dense surfaces of these paintings can be easily related to contemporary interfaces; 
in addition, they can be also related to the future aesthetics of a moving image, 
when the digital displays will move much beyond the resolution of analog 
television and film. 
 
Boustani, develops such an aesthetics of density. Taking his inspiration from 
Renaissance Dutch painting as well as from classical Japanese art, Boustani uses 
digital compositing to achieve unprecedented. for film, information density. 
While this density was typical for old art he draws on, it was never before 
achieved in cinema. In Brugge (1995) Boustani recreates the images typical of 
winter landscape scenes in Dutch seventeenth century painting. His next film A 
Viagem (The Voyage, 1998) achieves even higher information density; some 
shots of the film use as many as 1600 separate layers.  

The trilogy of computer films by Paris-based filmmaker Christian 

This new cinematic aesthetics of density seems to be highly appropriate 

for out age. If, from a city street to a Web page, we are surrounded by highly 
dense information surfaces, it is appropriate to expect from cinema similar logic. 
(In a same fashion, we may think of spatial montage as reflecting another 
contemporary daily experience: working with a number of different applications 
at once on a computer. If we are now used to distribute and rapidly switch our 
attention from one program to another, from one set of windows and command to 
another set, we may find multiple streams of audio-visual information presented 
simultaneously more satisfying than a single stream of traditional cinema.) 

It is appropriate that some of the most dense shots of A Viagem recreates a 
Renaissance marketplace, this symbol of emerging capitalism which was probably 
responsible for the new density of Renaissance painting (think, for instance, of 
Dutch still-lives which function as a kind of store display window aiming to 
overwhelm the viewer and seduce her into making a purchase). In the same way, 
in the 1990s the commercialization of the Internet was responsible for the new 
density of Web pages. By the end of the decade all home pages of  big companies 
and Internet portals became indexes containing dozens of entries in a small type. 
If every small area of the screen can potentially contain a lucrative add or a link to 
a page with one, this leaves no place for the aesthetics of emptiness and 

 

&#xC; 
275

minimalism. Thus it is not surprising that commercialized Web joined the same 
aesthetics of information density and competing signs and images which 
characterizes visual culture in a capitalist society in general. 

If Lialina&#x92;&rsquo;s spatial montage relies on HTML frames and actions of the user 

to activate images appearing in these frames, Boustani&#x92;&rsquo;s spatial montage is more 
purely cinematic and painterly. He combines mobility of camera and movement 
of objects characteristic of cinema which the &#x93;&ldquo;hyper-realism&#x94;&rdquo; of old Dutch 
painting which presented everything &#x93;&ldquo;in focus.&#x94;&rdquo; In analog cinema, the inevitable 
&#x93;&ldquo;depth of field&#x94;&rdquo; artifact acted as a limit to the information density of an image. 
The achievement of Boustani is to create images where every detail is in focus 
and yet the overall image is easily readable. This could only be done through 
digital compositing. By reducing visible reality to numbers the computer makes 
possible for us to literally see in a new way. If, according  to Benjamin, early 
twentieth century cinema used close-up "to bring things 'closer' spatially and 
humanly," "to get hold of an object at very close range,&#x94;&rdquo; and, as a result, 
destroyed their aura, digital composites of Boustani can be said to bring objects 
close to a viewer without &#x93;&ldquo;extracting&#x94;&rdquo; them away from their places in the word. 
(Of course also an opposite interpretation is possible: we can say that Boustani&#x92;&rsquo;s 
digital eye is super-human. Similar to the argument in &#x93;&ldquo;Synthetic Image and its 
subject&#x94;&rdquo; section, his vision can be interpreted as the gaze of a cyborg or computer 
vison system which can see things equally well at any distance.) 
 
factory, the movie theater, the shopping arcade &mdash; Walter Benjamin insisted on 
the contiguity between the perceptual experiences in the workplace and outside of 
it:  
 

Scrutinizing the prototypical perceptual spaces of modernity &mdash; the 

Whereas Poe's passers-by cast glances in all directions which still 
appeared to be aimless, today's pedestrians are obliged to do so in order to 
keep abreast of traffic signals. Thus technology has subjected the human 
sensorium to a complex kind of training. There came a day when a new 
and urgent need for stimuli was met by the film. In a film, perception in 
the form of shocks was established as a formal principle. That which 
determines the rhythm of production on a conveyer belt is the basis of the 
rhythm of reception in the film.387 

 
For Benjamin, the modern regime of perceptual labor, where the eye is constantly 
asked to process stimuli, equally manifests itself in work and leisure. The eye is 
trained to keep pace with the rhythm of industrial production at the factory and to 
navigate through the complex visual semiosphere beyond the factory gates. It is 
appropriate to expect that the computer age will follow the same logic, presenting 
the users with similarly structured perceptual experiences at work and at home, on 

 

&#xC; 
276

a computer screen and outside of it. Indeed, as I already noted, we now use the 
same interfaces for work and for leisure, the condition exemplified most 
dramatically by Web browsers. Another example is the use of the same interfaces 
in flight and military simulators, in computer games modeled after these 
simulators, and in the actual controls of planes and other vehicles (recall the 
popular perception of Gulf War as &#x93;&ldquo;video game war.&#x94;&rdquo;) But if Benjamin appears to 
regret that the subjects of an industrial lost pre-modern freedom of perception, 
now regimented by factory, modern city and film, we may instead think of 
information density of our own workspaces as a new aesthetic challenge, 
something to explore rather than to condemn. Similarly, we should explore the 
aesthetic possibilities of all aspects of user&#x92;&rsquo;s experience with a computer, this key 
experience of modern life: dynamic windows of GUI, multi-tasking, search 
engines, databases, navigable space, and others. 
 
 
Cinema as a Code 
 
When radically new cultural forms appropriate for the age of wireless 
telecommunication, multitasking operating systems and information appliances 
will arrive, what will they look like? How would we even know they are here? 
Would future films look like a "data shower" from the movie "Matrix"?  Is the 
famous fountain at Xerox Park in which the strength of the water stream reflects 
the behavior of the stock market, with stock data arriving in real time over 
Internet, represents the future of public sculpture?  

We don't yet know the answers to these questions. However, what artists 

and critics can do is point out the radically new nature of new media by staging &mdash; 
as opposed to hiding &mdash; its new properties. As my last example, I will discuss 
Vuk Cosic's ASCII films, which effectively stage one characteristic of computer-
based moving images &mdash; their identity as a computer code.

388

  

It is worthwhile to relate Cosic's films to both Zuse&rsquo;s "found footage 

389

 Zuse superimposes digital code over the 

movies" from the 1930s, which I invoke in the beginning of this book, and to the 
first all-digital feature length movie made sixty years later &mdash; Lucas's Stars Wars: 
Episode 1, The Phantom Menace.
film images. Lucas follows the opposite logic: in his film, digital code &ldquo;lies 
under&rdquo; his images. That is, given that most images in the film were put together 
on computer workstations, during the post-production process they were pure 
digital data. The frames were made up from numbers rather than bodies, faces, 
and landscapes. The Phantom Menace is, therefore, can be called the first feature-
length commercial abstract film: two hours worth of frames made up from matrix 
of numbers. But this is hidden from the audience. 

 

&#xC; 
277

390

391

What Lucas hides, Cosic reveals. His ASCII films "perform" the new 
status of media as digital data. The ASCII code that results when an image is 
digitized is displayed on the screen. The result is as satisfying poetically as it is 
conceptually &mdash; for what we get is a double image: a recognizable film image and 
an abstract code together. Both are visible at once. Thus, rather than erasing the 
image in favor of the code as in Zuse's film, or hiding the code from us as in 
Lucas's film, in ASCII films the code and the image coexist. 

Like VinylVideo project by Gebhard Sengm&uuml;ller which records TV 

 is a 

 Cosic's ASCII initiative

programs and films on old vinyl disks,
systematic program of translating media content from one obsolete format into 
another. These projects remind us that since at least the 1960s the operation of 
media translation has been at the core of our culture. Films transferred to video; 
video transferred from one video format to another; video transferred to digital 
data; digital data transferred from one format to another: from floppy disks to Jaz 
drives, from CD-ROMs to DVDs;  and so on, indefinitely. The artists noticed this 
new logic of culture early on: in the 1960s, Roy Lichtenstein and Andy Warhol 
already made media translation the basis of their art. Sengmuller and Cosic 
understand that the only way to deal with built-in media obsolescence of a 
modern society is by ironically resurrecting dead media. Sengmuller translates old 
TV programs into vinyl disks; Cosic translates old films into ASCII images.

392

  

Why do I call ASCII images an obsolete media format? Before the printers 

capable of outputting raster digital images became widely available toward the 
end of the 1980s, it was commonplace to make printouts of images on dot matrix 
printers by converting the images into ASCII code.  I was surprised that in 1999 I 
still was able to find the appropriate program on my UNIX system. Called simply 
"toascii," the command, according to the UNIX system manual page for the 
program, "prints textual characters that represent the black and white image used 
as input." 

394

  But in the case of ASCII code, its use evokes not only a peculiar 

The reference to early days of computing is not unique to Cosic but shared 
by other net.artists. Jodi.org, the famous net.art project created by the artistic team 
of Joan Heemskerk and Dirk Paesmans, often evokes DOS commands and the 
; a Russian 
characteristic green color of computer terminals from the 1980s
net.artist Alexei Shulgin has performed music in the late 1990s using old 
386PC.
episode in the history of computer culture but a number of earlier forms of media 
and communication technologies as well. ASCII is an abbreviation of American 
Standard Code for Information Interchange. The code was originally developed 
for teleprinters and was only later adopted for computers in the 1960s. A 
teleprinter was a twentieth-century telegraph system that translated the input from 
a typewriter keyboard into a series of coded electric impulses, which were then 
transmitted over communications lines to a receiving system, which decoded the 

393

 

&#xC; 
278

pulses and printed the message onto a paper tape or other medium. Teleprinters 
were introduced in the 1920s and were widely used until the 1980s (Telex being 
the most popular system), when they were gradually replaced by fax and 
computer networks.

395

  

ASCII code was itself an extension of an earlier code invented by Jean-

Maurice-Emile Baudot in 1874. In Baudot code, each letter of an alphabet is 
represented by a five-unit combination of current-on or current-off  signals of 
equal duration. ASCII code extends Baudot code by using eight-unit 
combinations (that is, eight "bits" or one "byte") to represent 256 different 
symbols. Baudot code itself was an improvement over the Morse code invented 
for early electric telegraph systems in the 1830s. And so on. 

The history of ASCII code compresses a number of technological and 

conceptual developments which lead to (but I am sure will not stop at) a modern 
digital computers: cryptography, real-time communication, communication 
network technology, coding systems. By juxtaposing ASCII code with the history 
of cinema, Cosic accomplishes what can be called an artistic compression. That 
is, along with staging the new status of moving images as a computer code, he 
also &ldquo;encodes&rdquo; in these images many key issues of computer culture and new 
media art. 
 
As this book has argued, in computer age, cinema, along with other established 
cultural forms, indeed becomes precisely a code. It is now used to communicate 
all types of data and experiences; and its language is encoded in interfaces and 
defaults of software programs and hardware itself. Yet, while on the one hand 
new media strengthens existing cultural forms and languages, including the 
language of cinema, it simultaneously &ldquo;opens&rdquo; them up for redefinition. The 
elements of their interfaces become separated from the types of data they were 
traditionally connected to. Further, what was previously in the background, on the 
margins, comes into the center. For instance, animation comes to challenge live 
cinema; spatial montage comes to challenge temporal montage, database comes to 
challenge narrative; search engine comes to challenge encyclopedia; and, last but 
not least, online distribution of culture challenges traditional &ldquo;off-line&rdquo; formats. 
To use a metaphor from computer culture, new media turns all culture and 
cultural theory into &ldquo;open source.&rdquo; This &ldquo;opening up&rdquo; of all cultural techniques, 
conventions, forms and concepts is ultimately the most positive cultural effect of 
computerization &mdash; the opportunity to see the world and the human being anew, in 
ways which were not available to A Man with a Movie Camera.         

 

&#xC; 
279

NOTES 

 
 
 
1 http://www.nettime.org 
2 http://www.rhizome.org 
3 Phong, B.T. &#x93;&ldquo;Illumination for Computer Generated Pictures,&#x94;&rdquo; Communication 
of the ACM, Volume 18, no. 6 (June 1975): 311-317. 
 
5 Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed. (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1970). 
6 By virtual worlds I mean 3D computer-generated interactive environments. This 
definition fits a whole range of 3D computer environments already in existence: 
high-end VR works which feature head-mounted displays and photo realistic 
graphics; arcade, CD-ROM and on-line multi-player computer games; QuickTime 
VR movies; VRML (The Virtual Reality Modeling Language) scenes; and 
graphical chat environments such as The Palace and Active Worlds. 

Virtual worlds represent an important trend across computer culture, 

consistently promising to become a new standard in human-computer interfaces 
and in computer networks. (For a discussion of why this promise may never be 
fulfilled, see &#x93;&ldquo;Navigable Space&#x94;&rdquo; section.) For example, Silicon Graphics 
developed a 3-D file system which was showcased in the movie Jurassic Park. 
Sony used a picture of a room as an interface in its MagicLink personal 
communicator. Apple's short-lived E-World greeted its users with a drawing of a 
city. Web designers often use pictures of buildings, aerial views of cities, and 
maps a interface metaphors. In the words of the scientists from Sony's The Virtual 
Society Project (www.csl.sony.co.jp/project/VS/), "It is our belief that future 
online systems will be characterized by a high degree of interaction, support for 
multi-media and most importantly the ability to support shared 3-D spaces. In our 
vision, users will not simply access textual based chat forums, but will enter into 
3-D worlds where they will be able to interact with the world and with other users 
in that world." 
7 Tzevan Todorov, Introduction to Poetics, trans. by Rchard Howard 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981), 6. 
8 Examples of software standards include operating systems such as UNIX, 
Windows and MAC OS; file formats (JPEG, MPEG, DV, QuickTime, RTF, 
WAV); scripting languages (HTML, Javascript); programming langauges (C++, 
Java); communication protocols (TCP-IP); the conventions of HCI (e.g. dialog 
boxes, copy and paste commands, help pointer); and also unwritten conventions, 

 

&#xC; 
280

 
such as the 640 by 480 pixel image size which was used for more than a decade. 
Hardware standards include storage media formats (ZIP, JAZ, CD-ROM, DVD), 
port types (serial, USB, Firewire), bus architectures (PCI), and RAM types. 
9 Vkutemas was a Moscow art and design school in the 1920s which united most 
Left avant-garde artists; it functioned as a counterpart of Bauhaus in Germany. 
10 Qtd. in Beumont Newhall, The History of Photography from 1839 to the 
Present Day. Revised and Enlarged Edition, fourth edition (New York: The 
Museum of Modern Art, 1964), 18. 
11 Newhall, The History of Photography, 17-22.  
12 Charles Eames, A Computer Perspective: Background To The Computer Age, 
1990 edition (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990), 18. 
13 David Bordwell and Kristin Thompson, Film Art: An Introduction, fifth edition 
(New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies), 15. 
14 Eames, A Computer Perspective, 22-27, 46-51, 90-91. 
15 Eames, A Computer Perspective, 120. 
16 Isaac Victor Kerlov and Judson Rosebush, Computer Graphics for Designes 
and Artists (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company,  1986), 14. 
17 Kerlov and Rosebush, Computer Graphics, 21.  
18 Roland Barthes,.Elements of Semiology (New York: Hill and Wang, 1968), 64.  
19 I discuss the particular cases of computer automation of visual communication 
in more detail in "Automation of Sight from Photography to Computer Vision," 
Electronic Culture: Technology and Visual Representation, edited by Timothy 
Druckery and Michael Sand (New York: Aperture, 1996); "Mapping Space: 
Perspective, Radar and Computer Graphics,&#x94;&rdquo; SIGGRAPH '93 Visual Proceedings, 
edited by Thomas Linehan, 143-147 (New York: ACM, 1993).   
20 http://www.mrl.nyu.edu/improv/, accessed June 29, 1999. 
21 http://www-white.media.mit.edu/vismod/demos/smartcam/, accessed June 29, 
1999. 
22 http://pattie.www.media.mit.edu/people/pattie/CACM-95/alife-cacm95.html, 
accessed June 29, 1999. 
23 This research was persued at diffirent groups at the MIT lab. See for instance 
home page of Gesture and Narrative Language Group, 
http://gn.www.media.mit.edu/groups/gn/, accessed June 29, 1999. 
24 See http://www.virage.com/products, accessed June 29, 1999. 

 

&#xC; 
281

 
25 http://agents.www.media.mit.edu/groups/agents/projects/, accessed June 29, 
1999. 
26 See my &#x93;&ldquo;Avant-Garde as Software,&#x94;&rdquo; in Ostranenie, edited by Stephen Kovats  
(Frankfurt and New York: Campus Verlag, 1999.). 
(http://visarts.ucsd.edu/~manovich) 
27 For an experiment in creating diffirent multimedia interfaces to the same text, 
see my Freud-Lissitzky Navigator (http://visarts.ucsd.edu/~manovich/FLN). 
28 http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/wax/, accessed October 24, 1999. 
29 Frank Halacz and Mayer Swartz, &#x93;&ldquo;The Dexter Hypertext Reference Model,&#x94;&rdquo; 
Communication of the ACM (New York: ACM, 1994), 30. 
30 Noam Chomsky, Syntactic Structures, reprint edition (Peter Lang Publishing, 
1978). 
31 &#x93;&ldquo;How Marketers &#x91;&lsquo;Profile&#x92;&rsquo; Users,&#x94;&rdquo; USA Today (November 9, 1999), 2A.  
32 See http://www.three.org. Our conversations helped me to clarify my ideas, 
and I am very grateful to Jon for the ongoing exchange.  
33 Marcos Novak, lecture at &#x93;&ldquo;Interactive Frictions&#x94;&rdquo; conference, University of 
Southern Californa, Los Angeles, June 6, 1999. 
34 Graame Weinbren, In the Ocean of Streams of Story, Millennium Film Journal 
28 (Spring 1995), 
http://www.sva.edu/MFJ/journalpages/MFJ28/GWOCEAN.HTML. 
35 Rick Moody, Demonology, first published in Conjunctions, reprinted in The 
KGB Bar Reader, qtd. in Vince Passaro, &#x93;&ldquo;Unlikely Stories,&#x94;&rdquo; Harper&#x92;&rsquo;s Magazine 
vol. 299, no. 1791 (August 1999), 88-89.  
36 Albert Abramson, Electronic Motion Pictures. A History of Television Camera 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1955), 15-24. 
37 Charles Musser, The Emergence of Cinema: The American Screen to 1907 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), 65. 
38 Mitchell, The Reconfigured Eye (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1982), 6. 
39 Mitchell, The Reconfigured Eye, 6.  
40 Mitchell, The Reconfigured Eye, 49. 
41 Ernst Gombrich analses "the beholder's share" in decoding the missing 
information in visual images in his classic Art and Illusion. A Study in the 
Psychology of Pictorial Representation (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1960).   

 

&#xC; 
282

 
42 The notion that computer interactive art has its origins in new art forms of the 
1960s is explored in S&ouml;ke Dinkla, "The History of the Interface in Interactive 
Art," ISEA (International Symposium on Electronic Art) 1994 Proceedings 
(http://www.uiah.fi/bookshop/isea_proc/nextgen/08.html, accessed August 12, 
1998); "From Participation to Interaction: Toward the Origins of Interactive Art," 
in Lynn Hershman Leeson, ed. Clicking In: Hot Links to a Digital Culture 
(Seattle: Bay Press, 1996): 279-290. See also Simon Penny, &#x93;&ldquo;Consumer Culture 
and the Technological Imperative: The Artist in Dataspace, in Simon Penny, ed., 
Criical Issues in Electronic Media (Alabany, New York: State University of New 
York Press, 1993): 47-74. 
43 This argument relies on a cognitivist perspective which stresses the active 
mental processes involved in comprehension of any cultural text. For an example 
of cognitivist aproach in film studies, see David Bordwell and Kristin Thompson, 
Film Art: an Introduction; David Bordwell, Narration in the Fiction Film 
(Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 1989). 
44 For a more detailed analysis of this tend, see my article "From the 
Externalization of the Psyche to the Implantation of Technology," in Mind 
Revolution: Interface Brain/Computer, edited by Florian R&ouml;tzer (M&uuml;nchen: 
Akademie Zum Dritten Jahrtausend, 1995), 90-100. 
45 Qtd. in Allan Sekula, "The Body and the Archive," October 39 (1987): 51. 
46 Hugo M&uuml;nsterberg, The Photoplay: A Psychological Study (New York: D. 
Aplleton & Co., 1916), 41. 
47 Sergei Eisenstein, "Notes for a Film of 'Capital,'" trans. Maciej Sliwowski, Jay 
Leuda, and Annette Michelson, October 2 (1976): 10. 
48 Timothy Druckrey, "Revenge of the Nerds. An Interview with Jaron Lanier," 
Afterimage (May 1991), 9. 
49 Fredric Jameson, The Prison-house of Langauge: a Critical Account of 
Structuralism and Russian Formalism (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1972). 
50 Jurgen Habermas, The Theory of Communicative Action, trans. Thomas 
McCarthy (Boston, Beacon Press, c1984-).  
51 Druckrey, "Revenge of the Nerds,&#x94;&rdquo; 6. 
52 Sigmund Freud, Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works 
(London: Hogarth Press, 1953), 4: 293. 
53 Edward Bradford Titchener, A Beginner's Psychology (New York: The 
Macmillan Company, 1915), 114.  

 

&#xC; 
283

 
54 George Lakoff, "Cognitive Linguistics," Versus 44/45 (1986): 149.  
55 Philip Johnson-Laird, Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of 
Language, Inference, and Consciousness (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1983). 
56 Louis Alhusser introduced his influential notion of ideological interpellation in 
his "Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses (Notes Towards an 
Investigation), in Lenin and Philosophy, trans. by Ben Brewster (New York: 
Monthly Review Press, 1971).  
57 Stephen Johnson&#x92;&rsquo;s Interface Culture makes a claim for the cultural significance 
of computer interface. 
58 Other examples of cultural theories which rely on &#x93;&ldquo;non-transparency of the 
code&#x94;&rdquo; idea are Yuri Lotman&#x92;&rsquo;s theory of secondary modeling systems, George 
Lakoff&#x92;&rsquo;s cognitive linguistics, Jacques Derrida&#x92;&rsquo;s critique of logocentrism and 
Marshall McLuhan&#x92;&rsquo;s media theory. 
59 http://www.ntticc.or.jp/permanent/index_e.html, accessed July 15, 1999. 
60 Brad. A. Myers, "A Brief History of Human Computer Interaction 
Technology," technical report CMU-CS-96-163 and Human Computer Interaction 
Institute Technical Report CMU-HCII-96-103 (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: 
Carnegie Mellon University, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, 1996).  
61 http://www.xanadu.net/the.project, accessed December 1, 1997. 
62 XML which is promoted as the replacement for HTML enables any user to 
create her customized markup language. Thus, the next stage in computer culture 
may involve authoring not simply new Web documents but new languages. For 
more information on XML, see http://www.ucc.ie/xml., accessed December 1, 
1997. 
63 http://www.hotwired.com/rgb/antirom/index2.html, accessed December 1,  
1997. 
64 See, for instance, Mark Pesce, "Ontos, Eros, Noos, Logos," keynote address for 
ISEA (International Symposium on Electronic Arts) 1995, 
http://www.xs4all.nl/~mpesce/iseakey.html, accessed December 1, 1997. 
65 http://www.backspace.org/iod, accessed July 15, 1999. 
66 http://www.netomat.net, accessed July 15, 1999. 
67 Roman Jakobson, "Deux aspects du langage et deux types d'aphasie", in Temps 
Modernes, no. 188 (January 1962).   

 

&#xC; 
284

 
68 XLM diversifies types of links available by including bi-directional links, 
multi-way links and links to a span of text rather than a simple point. 
69 This may imply that new digital rhetoric may have less to do with arranging 
information in a particular order and more to do simply with selecting what is 
included and what is not included in the total corpus being presented. 
70See 
http://www.aw.sgi.com/pages/home/pages/products/pages/poweranimator_film_s
gi/index.html, accessed December 1, 1997. 
71 In The Address of the Eye Vivian Sobchack discusses the three metaphors of 
frame, window and mirror which underlie modern film theory. The metaphor of a 
frame comes from modern painting and is central to formalist theory which is 
concerned with signification. The metaphor of window underlies realist film 
theory (Bazin) which stresses the act of perception. Realist theory follows Alberti 
in conceptualizing the cinema screen as a transparent window onto the world. 
Finally, the metaphor of a mirror is central to psychoanalytic film theory. In terms 
of these distinctions, my discussion here is concerned with the window metaphor. 
The distinctions themselves, however, open up a very productive space for 
thinking further about the relationships between cinema and computer media, in 
particular the cinema screen and the computer window. Vivian Sobchack, The 
Address of the Eye: a Phenomenology of Film Experience (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1992).   
72 Jacques Aumont et al., Aesthetics of Film (Austin: Texas University Press, 
1992), 13.  
73 By VR interface I mean the common forms of a head-mounted or head-coupled 
directed display employed in VR systems. For a popular review of such displays 
written when the popularity of VR was at its peak, see Steve Aukstakalnis and 
David Blatner, Silicon Mirage: The Art and Science of Virtual Reality (Berkeley: 
CA: Peachpit Press, 1992), pp. 80-98. For a more technical treatment, see Dean 
Kocian and Lee Task, "Visually Coupled Systems Hardware and the Human 
Interface" in Virtual Environments and Advanced Interface Design, edited by 
Woodrow Barfield and Thomas Furness III (New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1995), 175-257.   
74 See Kocian and Task for details on field of view of various VR displays. 
Although it varies widely between different systems, the typical size of the field 
of view in commercial head-mounted displays (HMD) available in the first part of 
the 1990's was 30-50o. 

 

&#xC; 
285

 
75 http://webspace.sgi.com/WebSpace/Help/1.1/index.html, accessed December 
1, 1997. 
76 See John Hartman and Josie Wernecke, The VRML 2.0 Handbook: Building 
Moving Worlds on the Web (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company, 1996), 363. 
77 Examples of an earlier trend are Return to Zork (Activision, 1993) and The 7th 
Guest (Trilobyte/Virgin Games, 1993). Examples of the later trend are Soulblade 
(Namco, 1997) and Tomb Raider (Eidos, 1996).  
78 Critical literature on computer games, and in particular on their visual 
language, remains slim. Useful facts on history of computer games, description of 
different genres and the interviews with the designers can be found in Chris 
McGowan and Jim McCullaugh, Entertainment in the Cyber Zone (New York: 
Random House, 1995). Another useful source is J.C. Herz, Joystick Nation: How 
Videogames Ate Our Quarters, Won Our Hearts, and Rewired Our Minds 
(Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1997). 
79 Dungeon Keeper (Bullfrog Productions, 1997).  
80 For a more detailed discussion of the history of computer imaging as gradual 
automation, see my articles "Mapping Space: Perspective, Radar and Computer 
Graphics," and "Automation of Sight from Photography to Computer Vision.&#x94;&rdquo; 
81 Moses Ma's presentation, panel "Putting a Human Face on Cyberspace: 
Designing Avatars and the Virtual Worlds They Live In," SIGGRAPH '97, 
August 7, 1997.  
82 Li-wei He, Michael Cohen, David Salesin, &#x93;&ldquo;The Virtual Cinematographer:  A 
Paradigm for Automatic Real-Time Camera Control and Directing,&#x94;&rdquo; SIGGRAPH 
&#x92;&rsquo;96 (http://research.microsoft.com/SIGGRAPH96/96/VirtualCinema.htm). 
83 See http://www.artcom.de/projects/invisible_shape/welcome.en, accessed 
December 1, 1997. 
84 Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin, Remediation: Understanding New Media 
(Camridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1999), 19. 
85 See Svetlana Alpers, The Art of Describing: Dutch Art in the Seventeenth 
Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983). See particularly chapter  
"Mapping Impulse."    
86 This historical connection is illustrated by popular flight simulator games 
where the computer screen is used to simulate the control panel of a plane, i.e. the 
very type of object from which computer interfaces have developed. The 
conceptual origin of modern GUI in a traditional instrument panel can be seen 

 

&#xC; 
286

 
even more clearly in the first graphical computer interfaces of the late 1960's and 
early 1970's which used tiled windows. The first tiled window interface was 
demonstrated by Douglas Engelbart in 1968.  
87 My analysis here focuses on the continuities between a computer screen and 
preeceding its representational conventions and technologies. For alterantive  
readings will take up the diffirences between the two, see exellent artcles by 
Vivian Sobchack, &#x93;&ldquo;Nostalgia for a Digital Object: Regrets on the Quickening of 
QuickTime,&#x94;&rdquo; in Millennium Film Journal (Winter 2000) and Norman Bryson, 
&#x93;&ldquo;Summer 1999 at TATE,&#x94;&rdquo; available from Tate Gallery, 413 West 14th Street, New 
York City. Bryson writes: &#x93;&ldquo;Though the [computer] screen is able to present a 
scenographic depth, it is obviously unlike the Albertian or Reneissance Window; 
its surface never vanishes before the imaginary depths behind it, it never truly 
opens into depth. But the PC screen does not behave like the modernist image, 
either. It cannot foreground the materiality of the surface (of pgments on canvas) 
since it has no materiality to speak of, other than the play of shifting light.&#x94;&rdquo; Both 
Sobchack and Bryson also stresss the diffirence between traditional image frame 
and multiple windows of a computer screen. Bryson: &#x93;&ldquo;basically the whole order 
of the frame is abolished, replaced by the order of superimposition or tiling.&#x94;&rdquo;  
88 The degree to which a frame that acts as a boundary between the two spaces is 
emphasized seems to be proportional to the degree of identification expected from 
the viewer. Thus, in cinema, where the identification is most intense, the frame as 
a separate object does not exist at all &#x97;&mdash; the screen simply ends at its boundaries 
&#x97;&mdash; while both in painting and in television the framing is much more pronounced.  
89 Here I agree with the parallel suggested by Anatoly Prokhorov between 
window interface and montage in cinema. 
90 For these origins, see, for instance, C.W. Ceram, Archeology of the Cinema 
(New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1965). 
91 Beaumont Newhall, Airborne Camera (New York: Hastings House, Publishers, 
1969).  
92 This is more than a conceptual similarity. In the late 1920s John H. Baird 
invented "phonovision," the first method for the recording and the playing back of 
a television signal. The signal was recorded on Edison's phonograph's record by a 
process very similar to making an audio recording. Baird named his recording 
machine "phonoscope." Albert Abramson, Electronic Motion Pictures (University 
of California Press, 1955), 41-42.     
93 Echoes of War (Boston: WGBH Boston, n.d.), videotape. 
94 Ibid. 

 

&#xC; 
287

 
95 Ibid. 
96 On SAGE, see exellent social history of early computing by Paul Edwards, The 
Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War America 
(MIT Press, 1996). For a shorter sumary of his argument, see Paul Edwards, "The 
Closed World. Systems discourse, military policy and post-World War II U.S. 
historical consciousness," in Cyborg Worlds: The Military Information Society,  
eds. Les Levidow and Kevin Robins (London:  Free Association Books, 1989). 
See also Howard Rheingold, Virtual Reality (New York: Simon & Schuster, Inc., 
1991), 68-93. 
97 Edwards (1989), 142. 
98 "Retrospectives II: The Early Years in Computer Graphics at MIT, Lincoln 
Lab, and Harvard," in SIGGRAPH '89 Panel Proceedings (New York: The 
Association for Computing Machinery, 1989), 22-24. 
99 Ibid., 42-54. 
100 Rheingold, 105. 
101 Qtd. in Rheingold, 104. 
102 Roland Barthes, "Diderot, Brecht, Eisenstein," in Images-Music-Text, ed. 
Stephen Heath (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977), 69-70. 
103 Ibid. 
104 While in the following I discuss the immobility of the subject of a screen in 
the context of the history of representation, we can also relate this condition to the 
history of communication. In Ancient Greece, communication was understood as 
an oral dialogue between people. It was also assumed that physical movement 
stimulated dialogue and the process of thinking. Aristotle and his pupils walked 
around while discussing philosophical problems. In the Middle Ages, a shift 
occured from a dialogue between subjects to communication between a subject 
and an information storage device, i.e., a book. A Medieval book chained to a 
table can be considered a precursor to the screen which &#x93;&ldquo;fixes&#x94;&rdquo; its subject in 
space. 
105 As summarized by Martin Jay, "Scopic Regimes of Modernity," in Vision and 
Visuality, edited by Hal Foster (Seattle: Bay Press, 1988), 7.   
106 Qtd. in Ibid, 7. 
107 Ibid, 8. 
108 Qtd. in Ibid., 9. 

 

&#xC; 
288

 
109 For a survey of perspectival instruments, see Martin Kemp, The Science of 
Art (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990), 167-220. 
110 Ibid., 171-172. 
111 Ibid., 200. 
112 Ibid. 
113 Anesthesiology emerges approximately at the same time. 
114 Walter Benjamin, "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," 
in Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt (New York: Schochen Books, 1969), 238. 
115 Anne Friedberg, Window Shopping: Cinema and the Postmodern (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1993), 2.   
116 See, for instance, David Bordwell, Janet Steiger and Kristin Thompson, The 
Classical Hollywood Cinema (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985). 
117 Qtd. in Ibid., 215. 
118 Ibid., 214. 
119 Friedberg, 134. She refers to Jean-Louis Baudry, "The Apparatus: 
Metapsychological Approaches to the Impression of Reality in the Cinema," in 
Narrative, Apparatus, Ideology, ed. Philip Rosen (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1986) and Charles Musser, The Emergence of Cinema: The 
American Screen to 1907 (New York: Charles Scribner and Sons, 1990). 
120 Qtd. in Baudry, 303.  
121 Friedberg, 28. 
122A typical VR system adds other ways of moving around, for instance, the 
ability to move forward in a single direction by simply pressing a button on a 
joystick. However, to change the direction the user still has to change the position 
of his/her body. 
123 Rheingold, 104. 
124 Ibid., 105. 
125 Ibid., 109. 
126 Marta Braun, Picturing Time: The Work of Etienne-Jules Marey (1830-1904) 
(Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1992), 34-35. 
127 Rheingold, 201-209. 
128 Qtd. in Ibid., 201. 

 

&#xC; 
289

 
129 Here I disagree with Friedberg who writes, "Phantasmagorias, panoramas, 
diaramas &#x97;&mdash; devices that concealed their machinery &#x97;&mdash; were dependent on the 
relative immobility of their spectators." (23) 
130 In some nineteenth century panoramas the central area was occupied by the 
simulation of a vehicle consistent with the subject of the panorama, such as a part 
of the ship. We can say that in this case virtual space of the simulation completely 
takes over the physical space. That is, physical space has no identity of its own &#x96;&ndash; 
not even such minimal negative identity as emptiness. It completely serves the 
simulation. 
131 I am refering here to Rem Koolhaus unrealized project for a new building for 
ZKM in Karlsruhe, Germany. See Rem Koolhaaus and Bruce Mau, S, M, L, XL 
(Penguin, 1998).  
132 Sampling across media is the subject of the Ph.D. dissertation (in progress) by 
Tarleton Gillespie (Department of Communication, University of California, San 
Diego); morping is the subject of Vivian Sobcack, ed., Meta-Morphing: Visual 
Transformation and the Culture of Quick-Change (University of Minnesota Press, 
1999). 
133 See my article "'Real' Wars: Esthetics and Professionalism in Computer 
Animation,&#x94;&rdquo; Design Issues 6, no. 1 (Fall 1991): 18-25. 
134 Switch 5, no. 2 (http://switch.sjsu.edu/CrackingtheMaze). 
135 Peter Eiseman, Diagram Diaries (New York: Universe Publishing, 1999), 
238-239. 
136 Issey Miyake Making Things, an exhibition at Foundation Cartier, Paris, 
October 13, 1998 &#x96;&ndash; January 17, 1999. 
137 http://www.viewpoint.com 
138 http://www.adobe.com 
139 http://www.macromedia.com 
140 htpp://www.aw.sgi.com 
141 http://www.apple.com/quicktime/authoring/tutorials.tml, accessed September 
26, 1999. 
142 http://geocities.yahoo.com 
143 http://www.turneupheat.com, acessed August 4, 1999. 
144 E.H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion; Roland Barthes, "The Death of the Author," 
in Image, Music, Text, ed. Stephen Heath (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 
1977). 

 

&#xC; 
290

 
145 Barthes, "The Death of the Author," 142. 
146 Bulat Galeyev, Soviet Faust. Lev Theremin &#x97;&mdash; Pioneer Of Electronic Art (in 
Russian) (Kazan, 1995), 19. 
147 http://www.microsoft.com; http://www.macromedia.com, accessed September 
22, 1999. 
148 Herbert Muschamp, &#x93;&ldquo;Blueprint: The Shock of the Familiar, The New York 
Times Magazine (December 13, 1998), 66. 
149 Musser, The Emergence of Cinema. 
150 Fredric Jameson, &#x93;&ldquo;Postmodernism and Consumer Society,&#x94;&rdquo; in Postmodernism 
and its Discontents, edited by E. Ann Kaplan (London and New York: Verso, 
1988): 15 
151 Jameson, &#x93;&ldquo;Postmodernism and Consumer Society,&#x94;&rdquo; 20. 
152 Peter Lunenfeld discusses the relevance of  Frampton to new media in his 
Snap to the Grid (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, forthcoming). 
153 Hollis Frampton, "The Withering Away of the State of the Art," in Circles of 
Confusion (Rochester: Visual Studies Workshop), 169. 
154 Thomas Porter and Tom Duff, &#x93;&ldquo;Compositing Digital Images,&#x94;&rdquo; Computer 
Graphics vol. 18, no. 3 (July 1984): 253-259. 
155 
http://www.apple.com/quicktime/resources/qt4/us/help/QuickTime%20Help.htm, 
accessed Septermebr 26, 1999. 
156 http://drogo.cset.it/mpeg, accessed September 26, 1999. 
157 For an exellent theoretical analysis of morphing, see Vivian Sobchack, &#x93;&ldquo;&#x92;&rsquo;At 
the Still Point of the Turning World&#x92;&rsquo;: Meta-Morphing and Meta-Stasis, in Vivian 
Sobchack, ed., Meta-Morphing: Visual Transformation and the Culture of Quick-
Change (University of Minnesota Press, 1999).  
158 Terence Riley, The Un-private House (New York: The Museum of Modern 
Art,1999). 
159 On presentational system of early cinema, see Charles Musser, The 
Emergence of Cinema: The American Screen to 1907 (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1990), 3. 
160 Paul Johnson, The Birth of the Modern: World Society 1815-1830 (London: 
Orion House, 1992), 156. 
161 The examples of Citizen Kane and Ivan the Terrible are from Aumont et al., 
Aesthetics of Film (Austin: Texas University Press, 1992), 41.  

 

&#xC; 
291

 
162 Dziga Vertov, "Kinoki. Perevorot" (Kinoki. A revolution), LEF 3 (1923): 140.  
163 Jen-Luc Godard, Son + Image, edited by Raymond Bellour (New York: the 
Museum of Modern Art, 1992)  p. 171.  
164 Ibid. 
165 See Paula Parisi, &#x93;&ldquo;Lunch on the Deck on the Titanic,&#x94;&rdquo; Wired 6.02 (February 
1998).  
166 IMadGibe. Virtual Advertising for Live Sport Events. A promotional flyer by 
ORAD, P.O. Box 2177, Kfar Saba 44425, Israel, 1998.  
167 Sergei Eisenstein, &#x93;&ldquo;The Filmic Forth Dimension,&#x94;&rdquo; in Film Form, trans. by Jay 
Leyda (San Diedo, New York, London: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1949).  
168 Eisenstein, &#x93;&ldquo;A Dialectical Approach to Film Form,&#x94;&rdquo; in Film Form. 
169  Eisenstein, &#x93;&ldquo;Statement,&#x94;&rdquo; in Film Fom, and &#x93;&ldquo;Synchronization of Senses,&#x94;&rdquo; in 
Film Sense, trans. by Jay Leyda (San Diedo, New York, London: Harcourt Brace 
& Company, 1942).   
170 For an exellent theoretical analysis of QuickTime and digital moving image in 
general, see Vivian Sobchack, &#x93;&ldquo;Nostalgia for a Digital Object: Regrets on the 
Quickening of QuickTime.&#x94;&rdquo; 
171 Private communication, Helsinki, October 4, 1999. 
172 Nelson Goodman, Languages of Art, second edition (Indianapolis and 
Camrbridge: Hackett Publishing Company, 1976), 252-253.  
173 Roland Barthes, &#x93;&ldquo;From Work to Text,&#x94;&rdquo; trans. Stephen Heath, in Image-Music-
Text (New York: Hill and Wang, 1977).  
174 www. yahoo.com, accessed March 27, 1999. 
175 Brenda Laurel, quoted in Rebecca Coyle, "The Genesis of Virtual Reality," in 
Future Visions: New Technologies of the Screen," edited by Philip Hayward and 
Tana Wollen (London: British Film Institute, 1993), 162. 
176 Fisher, 430. Emphasis mine &#x97;&mdash; LM. 
177 Fisher defines telepresence as "a technology which would allow remotely 
situated operators to receive enough sensory feedback to feel like they are really 
at a remote location and are able to do diffirent kinds of tasks." Scott Fisher, 
"Visual Interface Environments," in The Art of Human-Computer Interface 
Design, edited by Brenda Laurel (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company, Inc., 1990), 427. 

 

&#xC; 
292

 
178 I am grateful to Thomas Elsaesser for suggesting the term &#x93;&ldquo;image-instrument&#x94;&rdquo; 
and also making a number of other suggestions regarding &#x93;&ldquo;Teleaction&#x94;&rdquo; section as 
a whole. 
179 Bruno Latour, "Visualization and Cognition: Thinking with Eyes and Hands,"  
Knowledge and Society: Studies in the Sociology of Culture Past and Present 6 
(1986): 1-40. 
180 Ibid., 22. 
181 Ibid., 8. 
182 http://telegarden.aec.at, accessed March 27, 1999. 
183 Walter Benjamin, "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical  
Reproduction," in Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt (New York: Schochen Books, 
1969). 
184 Paul Virilio, "Big Optics," in On Justifying the Hypothetical Nature of Art and 
The Non-Identicality Within The Object World, ed. Peter Weibel (K&ouml;ln, 1992). 
Virilio's argument can also be found in his other texts, for instance, "Speed and 
Information: Cyberspace Alarm!" in CTHEORY (www.ctheory.com/a30-
cyberspace_alarm.html) and Open Sky, trans. by Julie Rose (London and New York: 
Verso, 1997).  
185 Virilio, "Big Optics," 90. 
186 Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Observer: On Vision  
and Modernity in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1990), 10. 
187 This point is argued in Mitchell, The Reconfigured Eye.  
188 Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of  
Psycho-Analysis, ed. Jacques-Alain Miller (New York and London: W.W.Norton, 
1978), 95. 
189 Martin Jay, Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in  
Twentieth-Century French Thought (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993). 
190 For a detailed analysis of this story, see Stephen Bann, The True Vine. On 
Western Representation and the Western Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1989). 
191 Onyx is a faster version or RealityEngine which was also manufactured by 
Silicon Graphics.  See www.sgi.com  
192 I am grateful to Peter Lunenfeld for pointing out this connection to me. 

 

&#xC; 
293

 
193 For an overview of the early history of computer art which includes the 
discussion of the &#x93;&ldquo;turn to illusionism,&#x94;&rdquo; see Frank Dietrich,  "Visual Intelligence: 
The First Decade of Computer Art," in Computer Graphics, 1985. 
194 Andre Bazin, What is Cinema? (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1967-71); Stephen Bann, The True Vine: on Visual Representation and the 
Western Tradition (Camridge, England, and New York: Cambridge University 
Pres, 1989).  
195 On the history of illusionism in cinema, see the influential theoretical analsis 
by Jean-Louis Comolli, "Machines of the Visible, The Cinematic Apparatus, 
edited by Teresa De Lauretis and Steven Health (New York: St. Martin Press), 
1980. I discuss Comolli argument in more detail in &#x93;&ldquo;Synthetic Realism as 
Brickolage&#x94;&rdquo; section below.  
196 Andr&eacute; Bazin, What is Cinema? Vol. 1 (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1967), 20. 
197 Bazin, What is Cinema? Vol. 1, 21. 
198 Bazin, What is Cinema? Vol. 1, 20. 
199 Bazin, What is Cinema? Vol. 1, 36-37. 
200 Jean-Louis Comolli, "Machines of the Visible,&#x94;&rdquo; 122 
201 Bordwell, David and Janet Staiger. "Technology, Style and Mode of 
Production," in David Bordwell, Janet Staiger and Kristin Thompson, The 
Classical Hollywood Cinema, 243-261. 
202 Cook, R., L. Carpenter and E. Catull. "The Reys Image Rendering 
Architecture." Computer Graphics. 21.4 (1987): 95. Emphasis mine - L.M. 
203 Cynthia Goodman, Digital Visions (New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1987), 
22, 102. 
204 Carpenter, L., A. Fournier and D. Fussell. "Fractal Surfaces." 
Communications of the ACM. 1981. 
205 Gardner, Geoffrey Y. "Simulation of Natural Scenes Using Textured Quadric 
Surfaces." Computer Graphics. 18.3 (1984): 21-30. 
Gardner, Geoffrey Y. "Visual Simulation of Clouds." Computer Graphics. 19.3 
(1985): 297-304. 
206 Gardner (1984), 19.  
207 Reeves, William T. "Particle Systems &#x97;&mdash; A Technique for Modeling a Class 
of Fuzzy Objects." ACM Transactions on Graphics. 2.3 (1983): 91-108. 

 

&#xC; 
294

 
208 Magnenat-Thalman, Nadia and Daniel Thalman. "The Direction of Synthetic 
Actors in the Film 'Rendezvous a Montreal'." IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications. December 1987. 
209 Carignan, M., Yang, Y., Thalmann, N., and Thalmann, D. "Dressing 
Animated Synthetic Actors with Complex Deformable Clothes." Computer 
Graphics. 26.2 (1992 ??): 99-104. 
210 Anjyo, K., Usami, Y., and Kurihara, T. "A Simple Method for Extracting the 
Natural Beauty of Hair." Computer Graphics. 26.2 (1992): 111-120. 
211 Steve Neale,.Cinema and Technology (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1985), 52. 
212 The folllowing are just a few well-known &#x93;&ldquo;classics&#x94;&rdquo; in the field devoted to 
this research: Nelson Max,."Vectorized procedure models for natural terrain: 
waves and islands in the sunset" Computer Graphics 15.3 (1981); Ken Perlin,."An 
Image Synthesizer," Computer Graphics. 19.3 (1985): 287-296; William 
T.Reeves, "Particle Systems &#x97;&mdash; A Technique for Modeling a Class of Fuzzy 
Objects" ACM Transactions on Graphics 2.3 (1983): 91-108; William T. Reeves 
and Ricki Blau, "Approximate and Probabilistic Algorithms for Shading and 
Rendering Structured Particle Systems" Computer Graphics 19.3 (1985): 313-
322. 
213 http://www.worlds.com, accessed September 9, 1999. 
214 http://www.activeworlds.com, accessed September 9, 1999. 
215 Cynthia Goodman, Digital Visions, 18-19. 
216 J. F Blinn,."Simulation of Wrinkled Surfaces," Computer Graphics (August 
1978): 286-92. 
217 The research in VR aims to go beyond the screen image in order to simulate 
both the perceptual and bodily experience of reality. 
218 See Roman Jakobson, "Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics," in Style 
In Language, ed. Thomas Sebeok (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1960).  
219 Walter Benjamin, "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," 
in Illuminations, ed. Hannah Arendt (New York: Schochen Books, 1969). 
220 Private communication, September 1995, St. Petersburg. 
221 On theories of suture in relation to cinema, see chapter 5 of Kaja Silverman, 
The Subject of Semiotics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). 
222 www.adweek.com, January 18, 1999. 
223 http://www.plumbdesign.com/thesaurus/, accessed May 14, 1999. 

 

&#xC; 
295

 
224 According to Janet Murray, digital environments have four essential 
properties: they are procedural, participatory, spatial and encyclopedic. As can be 
seen, spatial and encyclopedic can be correlated with the two forms I describe 
here: navigable space and a database. Janet Murray, Hamlet on the Holodeck &#x96;&ndash; 
The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1997), 
73. 
225 Sigfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, a Contribution to 
Anonymous History (New York: Oxford University Press, 1948).  
226 "database" Britannica Online.  <http://www.eb.com:180/cgi-
bin/g?DocF=micro/160/23.html> Accessed 27 November 1998. 
227 Jean-Francois Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, 
trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1984), 3.  
228 As early as 1985 Grolier, Inc. issued text-only "Academic American 
Encyclopedia" on CD-ROM. First multimedia encyclopedia was "Compton's 
MultiMedia Encyclopedia" published in 1989. 
229 See AI and Society 13.3, special issue on database aesthetics, edited by 
Victria Vesna (http://arts.ucsb.edu/~vesna/AI_Society/); SWITCH, The Database 
Issue (http://switch.sjsu.edu/), forthcoming spring 2000.  
230 http://www.teleportacia.org/anna 
231 George Legrady, personal communication, September 16, 1998.  
232 David Bordwell and Kristin Thompson define motivation in cinema in the 
following way: "Because films are human constructs, we can expect that any one 
element in a film will have some justification for being there. This justification is 
the motivation for that element." Here are some examples of motivation: "When 
Tom jumps from the balloon to chase a cat, we motivate his action by appealing 
to notions of how dogs are likely to act when cats are around." "The movement of 
a character across a room may motivate the moving of the camera to follow the 
action and keep the character within a frame." David Bordwell and Kristin 
Thompson, Film Art: an Introduction. 5th Edition, 80.  
233 Chris McGowan and Jim McCullaugh, Entertainment in the Cyber Zone (New 
York: Random House, 1995), 71. 
234 This is true for a procedural programming paradigm. In a object-oriented 
programming paradigm, represented by such computer langauges as Java and 
C++, algorithms and data structures are modeled together as objects.    
235 Mediamatic 8, no. 1 (Summer 1994), 1860.  

 

&#xC; 
296

 
236 Bob Laird, &#x93;&ldquo;Information Age Loosing Memory,&#x94;&rdquo; USA TODAY, Monday, 
October 25, 1999. 
237 http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/subst/misc/company-info.html/, 
http://www.oracle.com/database/oracle8i/, accessed Nov. 28, 1998;  
238 http://artnetweb.com/guggenheim/mediascape/shaw.html 
239 Harwood, Rehearsal of Memory, CD-ROM (London: Artec and Bookworks, 
1996.) 
240 http://www.telepresence.com/MENAGERIE, accessed October 22, 1998. 
241 http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/wax/, accessed September 12, 1998. 
242 http://www.cs.msu.su/wwwart/, accessed October 22, 1998. 
243 Mieke Bal, Naratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 1985), 8.  
244 The theory of marketdness was first developed by linguists of the Prague 
School in relation to phonology but subsequently applied to all levels of linguistic 
analysis. For example, "bitch" is the marked term and "dog" is unmarked term. 
Whereas the "bitch" is used only in relation to females, "dog" is applicable to both 
males and females. 
245 Fredric Jameson, "Postmodernism and Consumer Society," in The Anti-
Aesthetic. Essays on Postmodern Culture, ed. Hal Foster (Seattle: Bay Press, 
1983), 123.  
246 Roland Barthes, The Elements of Semiology (New York: Hill and Wang, 
1968), 58.  
247 Qtd. in ibid., 58. 
248 Christian Metz, "The Fiction Film and its Spectator: A Metapsychological 
Study," in Apparatus, edited by Theresa Hak Kyung Cha (New York: Tanam 
Press, 1980), p. 402. 
249 Rosalind Krauss, "Video: The Aesthetics of Narcissism," in John  Hanhardt, 
ed., Video Culture (Rochester: Visual Studies Workshop, 1987), 184. 
250 This analysis can be also applied to many interactive computer installation. 
The user of such an installtion is presented with her own image; the user is given 
the possibility to play with this image and also observe how her movements 
trigger various effects. In a diffirent sense, most of new media regardless of 
whether it represents to the user her image or not  can be said to activate the 
narcissistic condition because it represents to the user her actions and their results. 
In other words, it functions as a new kind of mirror which reflects not just the 

 

&#xC; 
297

 
human image but her activities. This is a diffirent kind of Narcissism: not a 
passive contemplation but action. The user moves the cursor around the screen; 
clicks on icons; presses the keys on the keyboard and so on. The computer screen 
acts as a mirror of these activities. Often, this mirror not simply reflects but 
greatly amplifies user&#x92;&rsquo;s actions. This is the second diffirence from traditional 
Narcissism. For instance, clicking on a folder icon activates an animation 
accompanied by sound; pressinng a button on a game pad sends the character to 
climb the mountain; and so on. But even without this amplification the modern 
GUI functions as a mirror, always representing the image of the user in the form 
of a cursor moving around the screen.   
251 Qtd. in Sam Hunter and John Jacobus, Modern Art: Painting, Sculpture and 
Architecture, 3rd ed. (New York: Abrams, 1992), 326.  
252 Frank Dietrich, "Visual Intelligence: The First Decade of Computer Art (1965 
&#x97;&mdash; 1975)," IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications (July 1985), 39. 
253 Gene Youngblood, Expanded Cinema (New York: E.P. Dutton & Co,Inc., 
1970), 210. 
254 Peter Greenaway, The Stairs&#x97;&mdash;Munich&#x97;&mdash;Projection 2 (London: Merrell 
Holberton Publishers, 1995), 21. 
255 Qtd. in David Pascoe, Peter Greenaway: Museums and Moving Images 
(London: Reaktion Books, 1997), 9-10. 
256 http://www.tem-nanterre.com/greenaway-100objects/, accesed November 3, 
1998.  
257 Greenaway, The Stairs&#x97;&mdash;Munich&#x97;&mdash;Projection 2, 47-53. 
258 Mikhail Kaufman, "An Interview," October 11 (Winter 1979): 65. 
259 It can be said that Vertov uses "the Kuleshov's effect" to give the meaning to 
the database records by placing them in a particular order.   
260 Linguistics, semiotics and philosophy use the concept of metalanguage. 
Metalanguage is the language used for the analysis of object language. Thus, a 
metalanguage may be thought of as a language about another language. A 
metatext is a text in metalanguage about a text in object language. For instance, an 
article in a fashion magazine is a metatext about the text of cloves. Or, HTML file 
is a metatext which desribes the text of a Web page. 
261 We should remember that various temporal montage techniques were still a 
novelty in the 1920s; for a contemporary viewer, they had the same status as 
&#x93;&ldquo;special effects&#x94;&rdquo; such as 3D characters are the viewer of the 1990s. Therefore, the 
original viewers of Vertov&#x92;&rsquo;s film probably experienced it as one long special 
effects sequence.  

 

&#xC; 
298

 
262 Ibid., 55. 
263 David Bordwell, &#x93;&ldquo;Classical Hollywood Film,&#x94;&rdquo; in Philip Rosen, Narrative, Apparatus, Ideology: A 
Film Theory Reader (Columbia University Press, 1987).  
264 J.C.Hertz, Joystick Nation (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1997), 90, 
84.    
265 Ibid., 150. 
266  Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven Rendall 
(Berkely, University of California Press, 1984), 129. 
267 Bal, Narratology, 130. Bal defines fabula as &#x93;&ldquo;a series of logically and 
chronologically related events that are caused or expeienced by actors&#x94;&rdquo; (5). 
268 In Understanding Comics Scott McLoud notes how, in contrast to Western 
comics, Japanese comics spend much more time on &#x93;&ldquo;description&#x94;&rdquo; which is not 
directly motivated by the narrative development. The same opposition holds 
between the language of classical Hollywood cinema and many films from the 
&#x93;&ldquo;east,&#x94;&rdquo; such as the works of Tarkovsky and Kore-eda. Although I recognize the 
danger of such a generalization, it is tempting to connect narration &#x96;&ndash; description 
opposition to a much larger opposition between traditionally Western and Eastern 
ways of existence and philosophies: the drive of a Western subject to know and 
conquer the world outside versus Buddhist emphasis on meditation and stasis. 
Scott McLoud, Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art (Harper Perennial, 
1994).  
269 Bal, Narratology, 130-132. 
270 Chris McGoman and Jim McCullaugh, Entertainment in the Cyber Zone 
(New York: Random House, 1995), 120. 
271 Qtd. in J.C.Hertz, Joystick Nation, 155-156. 
272 For critical anaylsis of motion simulator phenomenon, see Erkki Huhtamo, 
"Phantom Train to Technopia," in Minna Tarkka, ed., ISEA '94. The 5fth 
International Symposium on Electronic Art Catalogue (Helsinki: University of 
Art and Design, 1994); "Encapsulated  Bodies in Motion: Simulators and the 
Quest for Total Immersion," in Simon Penny, ed., Critical Issues in Electronic 
Media  (State University of New York Press, 1995). 
273 See www.cybergeography.com, accessed October 7, 1999. 
274 Stuart Card, George Robertson, Jock Mackingly, "The Information Visualizer, 
an Information Workplace," in CHI'91: Human Factors in Computing Systems 
Conference  Proceedings (New York: ACM, 1991) , 181-186; available online at 

 

&#xC; 
299

 
http://www.acm.org/pubs/articles/proceedings/chi/108844/p181-card/p181-
card.pdf, accessed June 18, 1999. 
275 http://www.artcom.de/projects/t_vision/, accessed Dec. 26, 1998. 
276 http://www.acm.org/sigchi/chi95/proceedings/panels/km_bdy.htm, accessed 
Dec. 26, 1998. 
277 William Gibson, Neuromancer (New York: Ace Books, 1984). 
278 Marcos Novak, "Liquid Architecture in Cyberspace," in Michael Benedict, 
ed., Cyberspace: First Steps (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1991). 
279 Mark Pesce, Peter Kennard and Anthony Parisi, "Cyberspace," 1994. 
Http://www.hyperreal.org/~mpesce/www.html, accessed June 17, 1999. 
280 Ibid.  
281 Michael Bendedict explores the relevance of some of these disciplines to the 
concept of cyberspace in the introduction to his groundbreaking anthology 
Cyberspace: First Steps, which remains one of the best books on the topic of 
cyberspace. Michael Benedict, ed., Cyberspace: First Steps (Cambridge, Mass.: 
The MIT Press, 1991). 
282 Henri Lefebvre, The Production of Space (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 
1991); Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison (New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1977); Fredric Jameson, The Geopolitical Aesthetic: 
Cinema and Space in the World System (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1992); David Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity (Oxford, England: 
Blackwell, 1989); Edward Soja, Postmodern Geographies: the Reassertion of 
Space in Critical Social Theory (London: Verso, 1989). 
283 See, for instance, Benedict, Cyberspace: First Steps; the articles of Marcos 
Novak (http://www.aud.ucla.edu/~marcos). 
284 http://icwhen.com/the70s/1971.html, accessed November 21, 1998. 
285 Heinrich W&ouml;lfflin, Principles of Art History, translated by M. D. Hottinger 
(New York, Dover Publications, 1950). 
286 Erwin Panofsky, Perspective as Symbolic Form, translated by Christopher S. 
Wood (New York: Zone Books, 1991). 
287 See my article "Mapping Space: Perspective, Radar and Computer Graphics."  
288 Quoted in Alla Efimova and Lev Manovich, "Object, Space, Culture: 
Introduction," in Tekstura: Russian Essays on Visual Culture, eds. Alla Efimova 
and Lev Manovich (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), xxvi. 

 

&#xC; 
300

 
289 Gilles Deleuse, Cinema (Minneapolis: University of Minessota Press, 1986-
1989). 
290 Jed Hatman and Josie Werneke, The VRML 2.0 Handbook (Reading, Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1996). 
291 See Ferdinand T&ouml;nnies, Community and Society, trans. Charles P. Loomis 
(East Lansing, Michigan State University Press, 1957). 
292 One importance exeption was the Apparatus theory developed by film 
theoreticians in the 1970s. 
293 Stewart Brand, The Media Lab (New York: Penguin Books, 1988), 141. 
294 Manuela Abel, ed., Jeffrew Shaw - a User's Manual (Kalsuhe, Germany: 
ZKM, 1997), 127 - 129. Three difirent versions of Legible City were created 
based on the plans of Manhattan, Amsterdam and Karlsruhe, Germany. 
295 http://www.softimage.com/Projects/Osmose/ 
296 George Legrady, Transitional Spaces, exhibition catalog (Munich: Siemens 
Kultur Programm, 1999), 5. 
297 For a discussion of Archigram group in the context of computer-based virtual 
spaces, see Hans-Peter Schwarz, Media-Art-History. Media Museum (Munich: 
Prestel-Verlag, 1997), 74-76. 
298 See, for instance, Visionary Architects: Boullee, Ledoux, Lequeu (Houston: 
University of St. Thomas, 1968); Heinrich Klotz, ed., Paper architecture: New 
Projects from the Soviet Union (Frankfurt: Deutsches Architekturmuseum, 1988). 
299 See, for instance, Dietrich Neumann, ed., Film architecture: Set Designs from 
Metropolis to Blade Runner (Munich: Prestel, 1996).  
300 Ilya Kabakov,  On the "Total Installation" (Bonn: Cantz Verlag, 1995). 
301  Ibid., 125. This and the following translations from Russian text of Kabakov 
are mine &#x97;&mdash; L.M. 
302 Ibid., 200. 
303 Ibid., 200-208. 
304 Ibid., 162. 
305 Ibid., 162. 
306 De Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, XVIII. 
307 Charles Baudelaire, "The Painter of Modern Life," in My Heart Laid Bare and 
Other Prose Writings (London: Soho Book Company, 1986). 
308 Walter Benjamin, "Paris, Capital of the Nineteenth Century," in Reflections 

 

&#xC; 
301

 
(New York: Schocken Books, 1986), 156. 
309 The distinction between Gemeinschaft and Gesellshaft was developed by 
T&ouml;nnies in Community and Society. 
310 Adilkno, The Media Archive (Brooklyn, New York: Autnomedia,1998), 99. 
311 Ibid., 100. 
312 Ibid. 
313 Ibid.  
314 This narrative of maturation can be also seen as a particular case of an 
initiation ceremony, something which traditionally was a part of every human 
society. 
315 Peter Gloor, Elements of Hypermedia Design (Boston, Basel, Berlin: Birkh&auml;user, 
1997). 
316 Anne Friedberg, Window Shopping, 2. 
317 Ibid. 
318 Ibid., 184. 
319 Ibid., 94. 
320 See Don Gentner and Jakob Nielson, "The Anti-Mac Interface," 
Communications of the ACM 39, no. 8 (August 1996), 70-82. Available online at 
http://www.acm.org/cacm/AUG96/antimac.htm. 
321 Benjamin Wooley, Virtual Worlds (Oxford, UK and Cambridge, USA: 
Blackwel, 1992), 39, 43. 
322 For more on the history of 3-D computer graphics, see my article "Mapping 
Space: Perspective, Radar and Computer Graphics.&#x94;&rdquo;  
323 http://www.es.com/product_index.html, accessed January 27, 1999. 
324 Elizabeth Sikorovsky, "Training spells Doom for Marines," Federal Computer 
Week, July 15, 1996, available online at 
http://www.fcm.com/pubs/fcw/0715/guide.htm. 
325 Paul Virilio, War and Cinema (London and New York: Verso, 1989). 
326 Marc Auge, Non-places. Introduction to an Anthropology of Supermodernity, 
translated by John Howe (London and New York: Verso, 1995), 78. 
327 Ibid., 53-53. 
328 Ibid., 79-80. 
329 Ibid., 101, 103. 

 

&#xC; 
302

 
330 Ibid., 94. 
331 De Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, XIV.  
332 Jean-Claude Dubost and Jean-Francois Gonthier, eds., Architecture for the 
Future (Paris: &Eacute;ditions Pierre Terrail, 1996), 171. 
333 Abel, Jeffrey Shaw, 138-139; 142-145. 
334 Here I am describing the particular application of EVE which I saw at 
"Multimediale 4" exhibition, Karlsruhe, Germany, May 1995. 
335 See Marcos Novak, Liquid Architectures in Cyberspace, in Cyberspace: The 
First Steps.  
336 Another notion which belongs to this paradigm of discontinuity is Ren&eacute; 
Thom's catastrophe theory. See his Structural Stability and Morphogenesis 
(Reading, Mass.: W.A. Benjamin, 1975).   
337 The phenomenon of motion rides has been already discussed in detail by 
Finish new media theoretician and historian Erki Huhtamo. 
338 For a list of some of these sites as of October 1999, see &#x93;&ldquo;Small-Screen 
Multiplex Wired 7.10 (October, 1999), 
http://www.wired.com/archive/7.10/multiplex.html. 
339 On the history of computer-based image analysis, see my article "Automation 
of Sight from Photography to Computer Vision.&#x94;&rdquo; 
340 Scott Billups, presentation during "Casting from Forest Lawn (Future of 
Performers) panel at  "The Artists Rights Digital Technology Symposium '96," 
Los Angeles, Directors Guild of America, February 16 1996. Billups was a major 
figure in bringing Hollywood and Silicon Valley together by way of the American 
Film Institute's Apple Laboratory and Advanced Technologies Programs in the 
late 1980s and ealy 1990s. See Paula Perisi, "The New Hollywood Silicon Stars," 
Wired 3.12 (December, 1995), 142-145; 202-210. 
341 Christian Metz, "The Fiction Film and its Spectator: A Metaphychological 
Study," in Apparatus, edited by Theresa Hak Kyung Cha (New York: Tanam 
Press, 1980), 402. 
342 Cinema as defined by its "super-genre" of fictional live action film belongs to 
media arts which, in contrast to traditional arts, rely on recordings of reality as 
their basis. Another term which is not as popular as "media arts" but perhaps is 
more precise is "recording arts." For the use of this term, see James Monaco, How 
to Read a Film, revised edition (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1981), 7.    

 

&#xC; 
303

 
343 Charles Musser, The Emergence of Cinema: The American Screen to 1907 
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1990), 49-50. 
344 Musser, The Emergence of Cinema, 25. 
345 C.W. Ceram, Archeology of the Cinema (New York: Harcourt, Brace & 
World, Inc., 1965), 44-45. 
346 The birth of cinema in the 1890s is accompanied by an interesting 
transformation: while the body as the generator of moving pictures disappears, it 
simultaneously becomes their new subject. Indeed, one of the key themes of early 
films produced by Edison is a human body in motion: a man sneezing, a famous 
bodybuider Sandow flexing his muscles, an athlete performing somesault, a 
woman dancing. Films of boxing matches play a key role in the commercial 
development of Kinetoscope. See Musser, The Emergence of Cinema, 72-79; 
David Robinson, From Peep Show to Palace: the Birth of American Film (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 44-48.  
347 Robinson, From Peep Show to Palace, 12. 
348 This arrangement was previously used in magic lantern projections; it is 
described in the second edition of Althanasius Kircher's Ars magna (1671). See 
Musser, The Emergence of Cinema, 21-22. 
349 Ceram, Archeology of the Cinema, 140. 
350 Musser, The Emergence of Cinema, 78. 
351 The extent of this lie is made clear by the films of Andy Warhol from the first 
part of the 1960s  &#x97;&mdash; perhaps the only real attempt to create cinema without a 
language. 
352 I have borrowed this definition of special effects from David Samuelson, 
Motion Picture Camera Techniques (London: Focal Press, 1978).  
353 The following examples illustrate this disavowal of special effects; other 
examples can be easily found. The first example is from popular discourse on 
cinema. A section entitled "Making the Movies" in Kenneth W. Leish Cinema 
(New York: Newsweek Books, 1974) contains short stories from the history of 
the movie industry. The heroes of these stories are actors, directors and producers; 
special effects artists are mentioned only once. The second example is from an 
academic source: the authors of the authoritative Aesthetics of Film (1983) state 
that "the goal of our book is to summarize from a synthetic and didactic 
perspective the diverse theoretical attempts at examining these empirical notions 
[terms from the lexicon of film technicians], including ideas like frame vs. shot, 
terms from production crews' vocabularies, the notion of identification produced 
by critical vocabulary, etc." The fact that the text never mentions special effects 

 

&#xC; 
304

 
techniques reflects the general lack of any historical or theroretical interest in the 
topic by film scholars. Bordwell and Thompson's Film Art: An Introduction 
which is used as a standard textbook in undergraduate film classes is a little better 
as it devotes three pages out of its five hundred pages to special effects. Finally, a 
relevant piece of statistics: a library of University of California, San Diego 
contains 4273 titles catalogued under the subject "motion pictures" and only 16 
tiles under "special effects cinematography." For the few important works 
addressing the larger cultural significance of special effects by film theoreticians 
see Vivian Sobchack and Scott Bukatman. Norman Klein is currently working on 
a history of special effects environments.   
Kenneth W. Leish Cinema (New York: Newsweek Books, 1974); Jacques 
Aumont, Alain Bergala, Michel Marie and Marc Vernet, Aesthetics of Film, trans. 
Richard Neupert (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1992), p. 7; David Bordwell 
and Kristin Thompson, Film Art: an Introduction, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-
Hill, Inc., 1993); Vivian Sobchack Screening Space: The American Science 
Fiction Film, 2nd ed. (New York: Ungar, 1987); Scott Bukatman, "The Artificial 
Infinite," in Visual Display, eds. Lynne Cooke and Peter Wollen (Seattle: Bay 
Press, 1995).  
354 For a discussion of the subsumption of the photographic to the graphic, see 
Peter Lunenfeld, "Art Post-History: Digital Photography and Electronic 
Semiotics," Photography After Photography, eds. v. Amelunxen, Stefan Iglhaut, 
Florian R&ouml;tzer, 58-66. M&uuml;nhen: Verlag der Kunst, 1995. 
355 For a complete list of people at ILM who worked on this film, see 
SIGGRAPH '94 Visual Proceedings (New York: ACM SIGGRAPH, 1994), 19. 
356 In this respect 1995 can be called the last year of digital media. At 1995 
National Association of Broadcasters convention Avid showed a working model 
of a digital video camera which records not on a video cassette but directly onto a 
hard drive. Once digital cameras become widely used, we will no longer have any 
reason to talk about digital media since the process of digitization will be 
eliminated. 
357 Here is another, even more radical definition: digital film = f (x, y, t). This 
definition would be greeted with joy by the proponents of abstract animation. 
Since computer breaks down every frame into pixels, a complete film can be 
defined as a function which, given horizontal, vertical and time location of each 
pixel, returns its color. This is actually how a computer represents a film, a 
representation which has a surprising affinity with a certain well-known the 
avant-garde vision of cinema! For a computer, a film is an abstract arrangement of 
colors changing in time, rather than something structured by "shots," "narrative," 
"actors" and so on. 

 

&#xC; 
305

 
358 Paula Parisi, &#x93;&ldquo;Grand Illusion,&#x94;&rdquo; Wired 7.05 (May 1999), 137. 
359 See Barbara Robertson, "Digital Magic: Appolo 13," Computer Graphics 
World (August 1995), 20. 
360 Mitchell, The Reconfigured Eye, 7. 
361 The full advantage of mapping time into 2-D space, already present in 
Edison's first cinema apparatus, is now realized: one can modify events in time by 
literally painting on a sequence of frames, treating them as a single image.  
362 See Robinson, From Peep Show to Palace, 165.  
363 See "Industrial Light & Magic alters history with MATADOR," promotion 
material by Parralax Software, SIGGRAPH 95 Conference, Los Angeles, August 
1995.  
364 See my &#x93;&ldquo;Avant-Garde as Software,&#x94;&rdquo; in Ostranenie, edited by Stephen Kovats  
(Frankfurt and New York: Campus Verlag, 1999.). 
(http://visarts.ucsd.edu/~manovich) 
365 For the experiments in painting on film by Lye, McLaren and Brackage, see 
Robert Russett and Cecile Starr, Experimental Animation (New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1976), pp. 65-71, 117-128; P. Adams Smith, 
Visionary Film, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 230, 136-227.   
366 Dziga Vertov coined the term "kino-eye" in the 1920s to describe the 
cinematic apparatus's ability "to record and organize the individual characteristics 
of life's phenomena into a whole, an essence, a conclusion." For Vertov, it was the 
presentation of film "facts," based as they were on materialist evidence, that 
defined the very nature of the cinema. See Kino-Eye: The Writings of Dziga 
Vertov, ed. Annette Michelson, trans. Kevin O'Brien (Berkely: University of 
California Press, 1984). The quotation above is from "Artistic Drama and Kino-
Eye," originally published in 1924, pages 47-49, 47.   
367 Reporting in December 1995 issue of Wired, Paula Parise writes: "A decade 
ago, only an intrepid few, led by George Lucas's Industrial Light and Magic, were 
doing high-quality digital work. Now computer imaging is considered an 
indespensable production tool for all films, from the smallest drama to the largest 
visual extravaganza." (Perisi, "The New Hollywood Silicon Stars," 144.)  
368 Mark Frauenfelder, &#x93;&ldquo;Hollywood&#x92;&rsquo;s Head Case, &#x93;&ldquo; Wired 7.08 (August 1999), 
112. 
369 Metz, "The Fiction Film and its Spectator: A Metaphychological Study."  

 

&#xC; 
306

 
370 This 28 minute film, made in 1962, is composed almost exclusively of still 
frames. For documentation, see Chris Marker, La Jet&eacute;e: Cin&eacute;-roman (New York: 
Zone Books, 1992). 
371 These parallels are further investigated in my &#x93;&ldquo;Little Movies&#x94;&rdquo; 
(http://visarts.ucsd.edu/~manovich/little-movies). 
372 Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 
373 &#x93;&ldquo;Little Movies&#x94;&rdquo; explorers the aesthetics of digital cinema and draws paralels 
between the early cinema of the 1990s, the structuralist filmmaking of the 1960s 
and the new media of the 1990s.  
374 http://www.danny.com, accessed September 9, 1999. 
375 http://www.activeworlds.com, accessed September 9, 1999. 
376 Natalie Bookchin&#x92;&rsquo;s CD-ROM &#x93;&ldquo;Databank of the Everyday&#x94;&rdquo; (1996) 
investigates the loop as a structure of everyday life. Since I did the larger part of 
cinematography and some interface design for this project, I do not discuss it in 
the main text.  
377 Terence Riley, The Un-private House (New York: The Museum of Modern 
Art,1999). 
378 http://www.mlab.uiah.fi/ 
379 My analysis is based on a project ptototype which I saw in October of 1999. 
The completed project is projected to have a male and a female character. 
380 Flora petrinsularis (1993) is included in the compilation CD-ROM, Artintact 1 
(Karlsruhe, Germany: ZKM/Center for Art and Media, 1994). These are other 
ZKM publications are available at www.zkm.de. 
381 Steven Neale, Cinema and Technology (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1985), 52. 
382 Edward Soja, keynote lecture at &#x93;&ldquo;History and Space&#x94;&rdquo; conference, University 
of Turku, Turku, Finland, October 2, 1999.  
383 http://www.telepolis.de/tp/deutsch/kunst/3040?1.html, accessed accessed 
September 16, 1999. Liliana&#x92;&rsquo;s other net.art projects can be found at 
http://www.teleportacia.org. 
384 Michel Foucault, Dits et ecrits. Selections, vol. 1 (New York: New Press, 
1997). 
385 Anne Hollander&#x92;&rsquo;s Moving Pictures presents paralells compositional and 
scenographic strategies in painting and cinema, and it can be a useful source for 
further thinking about both as precursors to contemporary information design. 

 

&#xC; 
307

 
Anne Hollander, Moving Pictures, reprint edition (Harvard University Press, 
1991). Another useful study which also systematically comparises between 
compositional and sceneographic strategies of the two media is Jacques Aumont, 
The Image, translated by Claire Pajackowska (London: British Film Institite, 
1997).  
386 Alpers, The Art of Describing. 
387 Walter Benjamin, "On Some Motives in Baudelaire," in Illuminations, ed. 
Hannah Arendt (New York: Schochen Books, 1969), 175. 
388 http:www.vuk.org/ascii, accessed May 29, 1999. 
389 The reason that I refer to Stars Wars: Episode 1, The Phantom Menace as the 
first all-digital film, as opposed to reserving this title for Toy Story a first feature 
length animation by Pixar (1995) is that the former relies on human actors and 
real sets, supplementing those with computer animation. It is, in other words, a 
traditional live action film simulated on computers, in contrast to Toy Story 
whose reference is cartoons and the tradition of computer animation. 
390 http://www.onlineloop.com/pub/VinulVideo. 
391 www.vuk.org/ascii/aae.html 
392 See also Bruce Sterling's Dead Media Project 
http://eff.bilkent.edu.tr/pub/Net_culture/Folklore/Dead_Media_Project/. 
393 www.jodi.org. 
394 www.easylife.org/386dx. 
395 "teleprinter" Encyclopaedia Britannica Online 
<http://www.eb.com:180/bol/topic?thes_id=378047> Accessed May 27, 1999. 

 

&#xC;