She is an artist, writer, filmmaker, and educator. Her work looks at places, spaces and moments where social, political and cultural structures take on visible forms, and spans video, sound, installation, photography, text, and data. David Birkin’s work explores the intersection of military and civilian culture. At its core is a concern for censorship and the edges of visibility, often focusing on omissions, redactions, glitches, or slips in the smooth surface of a political system to disclose a deeper ideological drive. Through their ongoing collaborations, Ghani and Birkin address a shared commitment to issues of legal and social justice.

My artwork examines how mass media and culture shape notions of truth and understanding of the “other.” I create video and interactive installations that combine social engagement, institutional critique and activist art together in an interdisciplinary practice. As a Chinese American artist, my practice reframes western art history and culture into cross-cultural and interdisciplinary contexts to examine how visual culture reflects and/or scripts dominant ideologies and overlooks, oppresses or forgets other narratives or histories. Curious about how the act of seeing is transformed by technology, my artwork slows viewers down to contemplate quiet moments or information they might otherwise miss.

Playing with a paradox, I imagine us as being built by our future descendants (humans or cyborg), and pose a question: If we are the games our children will program one day, can we influence the code they are writing? 

I am interested in the political implications of technology and explore them through performative works rooted in the absurd. My practice involves research, performance, photo-based animation, participatory virtual reality, and interactive new-media installations. The issues in my work—behavior, cruelty, ecological disaster and manipulation of information emerge as paradoxes rather than statements, in an almost fairy-tale fashion.

The avatar Andra8's speech was written in part originally by me and in part by a machine learning program I created with a researcher and programmer whose work engages digital culture and the infrastructure of knowledge production. We were interested in  emerging trends in language and metadata on social platforms. The program uses training data collected from the posts of “B-list” social media influencers (individuals with 10,000 to 1 million followers) to generate passages of text based on real-world examples.Though the combinations of words are novel, the machine has no inherent creativity.

Feeling disturbingly similar to the rhetoric of aspiring ‘influencers’, Andra’s speech highlights the way in which social media autonomously seeks out and promotes what we can call “preferred” content – that which speaks to diversity, inclusion, and health, while actually diluting any concept that might make a user uncomfortable. The content that survives this is, when we look closely, utterly nonsensical. 

My movements were motion captured and used for the 3D animation. As the piece progresses and the avatar Andra8 goes ‘off’ human data her more naturalistic human movements are blended–at times chaotically–with stock female 3D animation movements.

A found footage work which compares the parallel cinematic language of dessert commercials with that of ‘disaster porn’ found in the news and on the Internet. The sound, pulled from pedestrian-produced videos of demolitions, disasters, and storms, expresses the conditions of the contemporary crowd; its insatiable appetite for destruction and arousal; its inattention, its inability to look away; its anxiety and its ecstasy.

‘Dessert-Disaster’ involved months of online research, viewing hundreds of contemporary dessert commercials and disaster footage culled from news and prosumer-uploaded videos. After downloading them I created my own metadata library for the video files, tagging visual elements, especially the cinematic language involved in each clip  (such as ‘aerial shot’, ‘pan’, ‘slow motion’, etc). Quickly searching for tagged footage amongst thousands of files was an integral part of the editing process. I also mis-applied metadata to footage so that when I when I searched for a specific keyword I would also find footage it would be misapplied to, adding another chance element to the editing process. 

I am a writer, performer, sound artist, and software developer. My work investigates power dynamics of digital systems and the role of the 'user' — what it means to have one’s mind, memory, and relationships interlaced with perceptually infinite, corporate-owned, advertising-driven mechanisms. In performance, I use my live, unprocessed voice to mimic the rhythms, timbre, and affect of synthetic speech. This evokes uncanny entanglement with digitality, allows me to position my performing body as an aesthetic proxy or representative of Silicon Valley, and creates conceptual links between performer/audience and platform/user.

Attentive to the materializing of the immaterial - how to photograph temperature or wind, how to sculpt and photograph sound, how to formulate or make an image audible- we have explored the way time makes its mark, and how objects can record, hold and reveal embedded narratives.  Our practice gains form through the exploration of the tools of vision, alongside newer methods of seeing and writing images. Our work addresses processes of recording, transmission and reception, interference and transference and often seeks to materialize intangible or ephemeral states of matter.

We have selected works in this application that show how we use the digital and electronic arts in their expanded forms. Video, sound, live simulations, digital image creation, robotics and other forms are explored and combined. Delay Lines draws from our research and work with silica based mediums such as glass, integrated circuits, and soft robotics (silica, borosilicate, silicon, silicone) and includes a virtual environment authored in  the game developing software Unity. Woven Word creates sound from early computation methods made audible and the Pantograph work is a robotic arm which has been taught to draw by a child.

I am an artist and educator working with video and electronic media. I create single-channel works, multi-channel video installations, and participatory systems that invite viewers to examine the raw materiality of information technology and the human-designed conceptual frameworks that determine their structure, function, and influence. My work incorporates practices and visual vocabularies relating to audiovisual synthesis, video games, and the history of cybernetics and computers.

Creative computer programming is central to my work as sound-artist/musician. I build Max/MSP programs juxtaposing complex rhythmic structures onto natural and electronic sounds by controlling audio delay/filtering. I’m influenced by electroacoustic experimentation, psychoacoustics, and a long fascination with outdoor listening-observation in urban/rural contexts, and generative systems. Projects range from interactive soundwalks, music for mechanized musical instruments, and a live-sound-processing, laptop-based "instrument" for performing-- electronically altering my voice, and acoustic instruments. My multi-channel Audio Chandelier projects refract one sound source to many speakers, pixelating them to create many psychoacoustic experiences from the relaxing (abstracting wind-chimes/crickets) to highly abstract immersive electronic music.

I am a multidisciplinary artist whose work combines immersive installation, participatory performance, video, and sculpture to reveal the closeness of the everyday and uncanny. With a self-conscious and inquisitive approach to our cultural obsession with self-improvement, comparison, and technology, I ask what kind of empowerment or betterment can still be claimed by fantasy while unearthing the fantasies that already make up reality. I hope to create an abiding sense of possibility, and an appreciation for the intimacy of the ordinary and extraordinary.

Indebted to the history of artists’ video works for television, our video platform responds to new genres of video shaped by internet audiences, such as activist campaigns or journalistic videos. Both videos excerpted dialog with the current news cycle by providing context, historical perspective, and experimental animations: one overviews the power structures that fund geoengineering; the other campaigns against the prospects of Deep Sea Mining, a new mining frontier. For example, WhatisDeepSeaMining?ToolsforOceanLiteracy explores CGI animation, referencing Charles and Ray Eames’ Powers of Ten pedagogic video, to talk about the various strata of technology that sense the ocean floor.

I am an interdisciplinary artist whose work manifests the politics and poetics of the information age. In my practice, I take data that is illegible or hidden, and recontextualize it into conceptually accessible and emotionally legible formats. This fluid approach spans multiple media and practices, including software art, video, performance, and social practice. While technically sophisticated, my work eschews the novelty of new technology to instead explore appropriation, digital vernacular, and the political economy of Internet culture.

My practice considers the litany of abstractions that lend a veneer of respectability to the machinations of global capital, and probes the erasures/distortions that these abstractions necessitate to maintain composure. At times, my projects take a monumental form to employ poetic resonance—as in Print Wikipedia’s 7,473 volumes— or my projects require long-term durational performance, like when I used custom software to monitor myself for a year as part of Quantified Self Portrait.  I also work as an organizer/activist, creating digitally coordinated, socially engaged collaborations like Art+Feminism— of which I am a co-founder.

My current practice revolves around issues of displacement, migration, autobiography and life inside the late stage-capitalist landscape. Utilizing observation, performance for the camera and wearable sculptures and installations, I explore family history and identity construction, adapting various personas. I employ numerous techniques and methods, juxtaposing video works with objects as part of the process. I am interested in presenting an absurd quotidian, temporal habitat and environment, highlighting the unstable state of our desires, home, status, past and present, as well as our failing ideals and political systems.

DOTDOT is a creative studio working at the intersection of art, design and technology. Their work is exhibited in virtual reality, augmented reality and multiplayer networked gaming and aims to achieve positive social outcomes. Happiest when we are playing at the edge of what is possible, we bring together filmmakers, mechatronics engineers, documentary storytellers, game designers, dancers and developers to create experiences that delight and inspire.

Most of the work featured in my portfolio was exhibited in “Love Action Art Lounge” at Franklin Street Works in Stamford, CT, 2017. Curated by Terri C. Smith, the group show aspired to become a people-positive “hang-out” space, echoing the underground music clubs and celebratory rituals featured in the work of participating artists and collectives. My contribution to the show included a commissioned site-specific installation that filled most of the basement level gallery with geometric furniture, a light sculpture, a photo-mural, drawings, and a series of glow-in-the-dark paintings. I also created lighting design for the gallery’s stairwell, and exhibited additional paintings in the street level gallery space.

I make colorful collage films, experimental videos, and found footage essays that strive to visually explore histories and movements of resistance. For my experimental animation work, I construct paper cut-out collages which I animate on a multi-tiered system of glass panes, utilizing everyday objects and available materials. In addition to cut-out collage animation, I also work with 16mm found/ confiscated footage, 16mm clear leader, oil paint animation, hand-drawn rotoscoping, and any tangible and palpable animation form I can quite literally “get my hands on.” Recently, I have been exploring ways to incorporate my experimental animation techniques alongside live action film. I also have begun exploring digital animation practices in my own work, and the ways in which the work of “the hand” translates through these modes of production.

In my installations, videos and photographs recurring themes include control and power of the gaze, hierarchies of looking, and the tendency to objectify “the other”. The gaze is inherently ideological, reflecting a hierarchical relationship between viewer and the object of the gaze. I want to make work that actively looks back, where the passive role of the audience is interrupted. My installations evoke physical interactive experiences that position the viewer in a self-conscious, participatory role. I am interested in relations of power and scale, vulnerability of the human body versus the dominance of surveillance infrastructure and corporate architecture.

I am a multi-disciplinary artist—writer, typographer, book artist, animator and performer. Over the past four decades I have been producing multimedia projects that explore the complexity and luminescence of character and the impact of social structures on the individual. I am known most for my self- and collaboratively-authored projects that attempt to capture the shape of thought and reunite the oral and pictorial traditions of storytelling on page and screen through the use of typography and images. Animations—seen in performance/readings, exhibits, and online—allow for expansive typographic interpretation of texts bridging the experience of reading and watching.

I am interested in exploring physical methods of communication, the choreography of message sending, and signal clarity in the presence of visual noise. How might a viewer parse or comprehend encoded information when overwhelmed by ongoing motion? I have furthermore sought to understand how the content of a message shifts when the rate of transmission is slowed, the experience of message inundation, and how listening or interpretation works in a purely visual language. I create work utilizing absurdity to highlight the contradictory nature of contemporary communications and systems which serve to obfuscating through visual or verbal logical argument fallacies.

I am an artist who’s practice utilizes digital media, image making, and video. My work takes inspiration from humanity’s interactions with and perceptions of digitally simulated domains, urbanism, technology, and what we once called “Nature.” In opposition to seeing these subjects as categorically different, my works look to reveal the entanglement of these spaces, shedding light on their deep interaction and co-production of one another.
The prints in “Contours” utilize digital imagery manipulated by 3D rendering, compositing, and Photoshop. These technical choices, aside from the fact that my practice is grounded both conceptually and by way of materiality in digital production, is to focus on a dominant view from the Western world: the digital, and ultimately manipulated, image. 

The image objects themselves are unframed dye-sublimation prints on Aluminum with a cleat mounted on the back to hang. This material choice makes for a very lightweight image that sheds all of the excess that a normal framed photographic work would have. In doing so, the images have a feeling of autonomy. They seem to float weightlessly in a similar manner to those images we interact with in digital space. 

Arts.codes is an artist collective that creates art with computational underpinnings. As an artist collective we work on projects involving multimedia presentations of data narratives. We have recently been creating work in virtual reality and immersive interactive environments where every aspect of the experience is governed by datasets. Six months after the launch of our projects, we open-source our code and process so that collaborating scientists and the public can build upon our work in their own practice. In addition, we produce articles about historical and contemporary algorithmic art forms on our interactive website as part of our practice.

The sound is created from sonifications of nanoparticles. It is also a platform for creating frameworks so that scientists can create their own aesthetically pleasing forms in VR/3D prints using unique data sets.

The data used for Háček is taken from real network traffic logs, tracking hackers in real time as they race to be the first in line at the Shmoo Group website. The VR experience allows users to dynamically choose between data paths, each of which represents a single individual, as they strive to get into the middle of a generated mountainscape. The VR experience is projected live onto a site-specific sculpture. The metaphors of networked landscape, security and wayfinding work to transform somewhat banal data into a compelling experience. 

The final iteration of both projects has been released as an open source coding projects and as a stand alone applications.

Blake Marques Carrington is a Digital and Multimedia Artist who teaches at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York. Enrique Ramirez is an art and architectural historian, musician, and Critic in Graphic Design at Yale School of Art. Marques Carrington works within the spheres of the sound, visual and performing arts. His work focuses largely on coding and performing live audiovisual pieces that treat sound, image and architecture as formal objects of translation. Ramirez continually finds new modes of writing and audiovisual techniques to communicate themes in the history of art and architecture.

Blake Marques Carrington and Enrique Ramirez’s combined digital work and musical composition, called “The Albers Variations,” explores new directions in using archival and artistic materials in a performance setting. Through a series of formal and sonic manipulations, a set of Josef Albers’ Homage to the Square paintings are converted into light and sound. A bass guitar provides aural textures and chord inversions that, in turn, alter the light and sound and create new “variants” of Albers’ paintings. “The Albers Variations” considers how aspects of digital art and musical performance—sampling, coding, recording, and live instrumentation—create a new understanding of art history.

In our time-based sculptures, we often create restorative, or emancipatory micro-historical leaps. Digital animation and our rotoscoping process forms an experimental choreography, made explicitly for the screen. 

Through an interdisciplinary practice that often utilizes video, glass fabrication, performance, and set design, my work illuminates absurd acts of failure within our entertainment and advertisement industries, exposing notions of classism, sexism, and queer objectification. I have an urgent need to investigate platforms such as infomercials, The QVC Network, talk shows, reality television, game shows, sitcoms, and most recently, department stores. By detaching these stages from their usual audience and status I am able to upend heteronormativity within the realm of entertainment and mainstream marketing. This allows space for impulsive performance characters that consciously inhabit absurd feminized and homoerotic roles.

In my practice I create concrete poetry, shaped envelopes that contain and explore many contextual issues. The prominent issues here address interactions with each other and the planet, politics, the tenets we use to live by, prayers, quotes, headlines, cries and whispers. The key component text, appears as Morse code, barcode, the alphabet normal and numerically coded. The compositions code switch as they conjure quilts, pictographs and cryptograms. My intention is to create subtle drawings with minimal color additions that synergistically interact with the ground. I create complex structured images that reward the patient viewer upon closer inspection.

I leverage interdisciplinary and multi-sensory art to shift dominant narratives on diasporic and indigenous experiences in order to advocate for a more environmentally and racially equitable future. My research-based practice examines forgotten historical watershed moments that triggered waves of dispossession and enslavement that haunt our present. I often co-labor with scholars, scientists and communities to question foundational knowledge on the ramifications of colonialism that manifest in current crises. Working from a land-based perspective, I excavate the social history of plants to illustrate vignettes into wealth inequality, environmental degradation, and patterns of resource exploitation.

The goal of our practice is to transcends mere representation and promotes the connection of people to places through material, culture, and narrative.  Our method of representation suggests an alternative means of generating compelling vignettes while promoting place over space that exalts experience and authenticity over image and effect. All of the projects interweave materiality with narrative and abstraction as a way to encourage a direct experience between the viewer and the representation of place through the combination of augmented reality projected over physical architectural maquettes.
Work Statement

This selection of architectural provocations explores the concept of negativity as experience within the encapsulated environments of architectural maquettes. As a critical response to the object nature of the production of space, this series of sculptures operate at the nexus of abstract form and notions of place through the use of augmented reality as an expression of the intangible hidden meanings embedded within the built environment as manifestations of our cultural subconscious. These maquettes attempt to offer both unique subjective experience and collective contemporary cultural symbolism as layers of augmented reality over physically modeled aspects of the everyday.

In my work, I turn my photographic eye towards the behavior of images online. I immerse myself in their manifold destinies: how they are orphaned, co-opted, and transformed within the flattened hierarchy of vertically-scrolling feeds. I seek out painterly gestures, universal symbols, and natural forms that are constellated, shifted and decontextualized, but remain identifiable through the indexical grain of photography.

Using historic film and literary references, my work engages a radical critique of normative cinema. Creating phantasmagoric worlds of outsize characters in which the only constant, is an ever-shifting balance of power. My practice is a conflux of spectacle and intimacy, examining existential questions of survival through subcultural agency.

My work is inspired by cultural theorist Patricia MacCormack’s writings on visceral cinema, which position the physical pleasure of experiencing cinema, as being “inherently queer.” I use multiple screens and timed lighting to create a visceral tableau of images that act as counterpoints to one another, while disrupting avenues of easy meaning for the audience. I collaborate with performers to create dialogues that reflect their own lives while intersecting with fiction, and use low frequencies/heavy bass to build a hypnotic environment–referencing MacCormack’s ideas of "tension and release"–where the viewer finds themselves complicit with the story unfolding on the screens.

Technology mediates our experiences and understanding, pushing us along the posthuman continuum. Algorithms show us the fragility of communications; power of speed, memory and connectivity; and our deficits. As a new media, fiber, and installation artist, I build interactive systems which demonstrate the gaps and connections that technology creates.

I am fascinated with network packet sniffing; bots masquerading as humans; machine learning; and machine knitting. I write code, coupling it with circuits, sensors, lights, speakers and fibers to build interactive objects and environments where views engage with existing power structures and frameworks, under a critical lens.

As ephemeralities a pulse of light or a sound are communication signals—a presence of another; the transportation of a message. My work explores presence and connection facilitated by technology. Software creates platforms where strangers connect. Electronic circuits visualize the airwaves invisible sonic chatter. Technology also brings its own vulnerabilities in these transactions, which has long lasting effects. What happens when we depend on technology to guard our cherished memories, and instead it destroys them? Or when we ask technology to be our receptionist? Influenced by the cultural shifts that technology creates, these pieces imagine a future dystopia warped by technology.

I integrate videos and other time-based technologies into sculptures and installations in order to translate the individual impacts and sociocultural sources of trauma into experiential, multi-sensory art. Manifesting as confrontational and disquieting spaces, structures, and beings, my work is surreal, multi-dimensional, and often psychically charged with the living properties of body, motion, and/ or voice.  I manipulate technologies and 3D forms in interactive and immersive ways, resulting in projects that communicate unspeakable experiences through the immediacy of sensation and emotion, and therein incite an intuitive emotional response in participants.

Images #1–4 and video #1 document my exhibition “Between Tin Men: Gifts and Souvenirs.”  Part interactive video installation, I repurposed an antique mirror with two-way mirrored plexiglass, and rear projected HD video onto the surface. Viewers triggered individual clips of characters via glowing USB button programmed to act like a space bar. The video clips were arranged in QLab to simulate randomness. 

I create videos and installations as a means of coping with the contradictory nature of human connection across networked space. My approach to narrative recalls the logic of browsing; I foreground distraction as a methodology. Combining original footage with found media—which may include anything from makeup tutorials, to NASA live-streams—I mirror the stimulus that we are constantly confronted with online. 

The clips I choose often guide compositions about recognition, or artificiality. The result is a material record of the present moment in its synthetic glory: the assimilation of memory into data, emotion into insular venting, and image into uni-dimensional JPEG.

His art and research practice engages with the philosophical, poetic, and political dimensions of computation by examining the ever-shifting discrepancy between what is computable in theory and in reality. His current work addresses the automation of perception, as well as notions of opacity and situated knowledges in artificial intelligence research.

Although his work takes technology as subject matter and often central aspects of its execution, Philipp works in various media including sculpture, installation, artist book, printmaking, photography, and website.

I am a multi-disciplinary artist, working in installation, painting, collage, video and performance. The work sample I have included is a project designed specifically for Instagram, and was born after the 2016 election; it is crafted, broadcast and framed digitally through social media, and installed physically in the NYC subway system. I am interested in speaking to social, political, and cultural realities, and using materials and technologies in unexpected, irreverent ways to do so.

My work investigates contemporary entanglements of technology and urban life. I examine the convergence of new and emerging technologies with the built environment, and search for everyday sites and conditions within which critical exploits can be situated and evolved. My work takes as its vehicle an experimental practice that produces artifacts, systems and media whose performance or behavior reveal or make evident these conditions and their implications for everyday life. I aim to contribute to the discourse surrounding these issues along critical trajectories that question traditional design criteria and engineering solutions based on notions of optimization, efficiency, and seamlessness.

Double Take Labs is an experience design studio that creates unique installations and exhibitions with a touch of "rigorous absurdity." Rigor refers to the research and seriousness we give to even the most ridiculous of ideas. Absurdity is our way of using humor and delight to break down barriers to complex concepts. Our technological experiments aim to draw out the surprising and unfamiliar from the seemingly ordinary. Whatever scale we’re working at, whether a large public space or within the pages of a book, we are constantly experimenting with new ways to inspire audiences to take a second look.

My work combines craft and sculpture techniques with open-source electronic experiments to build video and web-based narratives of a strange present and sometimes future. I take a critical perspective on emerging and wearable technologies by creating electronics that are counterproductive, humorous, and uncontrollable. A recurring theme in my work has been the relationship between technology, the body, and personal and public space, grounded in the belief that absurdity can be an appropriate response to technologically-enabled feelings of anxiety and alienation.

I am inspired by Miwon Kwon’s 1997 prophetic understanding that “site has been transformed from a physical location-grounded, fixed, actual--to a discursive vector--ungrounded, fluid, virtual…” Though my works are diverse in content, they are fundamentally driven by an interest in shifting spatial and object relations, often as a form of spacial or institutional intervention. Some works focus on site specificity, events, cityscapes or landscapes, to explore intersections of origin, function, meaning, aesthetics, and social or cultural context. Others employ a 2D image or 3D domestic tableau as sites to launch and entertain coexistent virtual scenes or characters.

I am an artist and poet who writes poetry with computer programs. My work uncovers new unconventional ways of speaking, with an aim to give a voice to the previously unspeakable. As a programmer, my practice draws attention to the unusual (and often invisible) ways that computational abstractions distort language, then to twist those systems around on themselves in order to produce language that falls outside of any existing linguistic abstraction. As a poet, I use computational techniques to produce difficult texts that invite readers to invent new hermeneutics, and—in this process—reconsider how they normally interpret texts.

The included work samples demonstrate my practice's recent focus on how machine learning models of text afford new ways to produce poetic cohesion through repetition, variation and juxtaposition. Vectorization techniques (like the model in Articulations) make it possible to easily "query" a corpus for similar items. Generative models (like those used in Interpolations and Compasses) define a literal topography from which new words, images and poems can be sampled and interpolated. My work in these samples is intended to demonstrate how these machine learning techniques can be employed to produce new kinds of expressive language—not just imitations of existing forms.

I am a research-based artist. My work examines the reciprocal relationships between technology and its influence on human subjectivity, culture, identity. In my project oriented practice, each work involves a deep dive into a new body of research, resulting in new modalities of thinking and making. As such, I have utilized techniques ranging from sculpture, laboratory work, biometric sensing, perfumery, robotics, projection, and cell culturing. Reoccurring themes in my work include gender politics, biopolitics, labor, nostalgia and sexuality. My work imbues scientific processes with narrative and emotional expression, humanizing technology and blurring the lines between rational/emotional, hard/wet, human/machine, engineered/organic.

In my research based practice, each project questions influences of technology on society. "Real Virtual Feelings" emits a drop of dopamine for each "like" received on social media, drawing conduits between the virtual & the physiological. "Mind in the Machine" is a portrait of a factory worker, made by a knitting machine that was programmed to knit in accordance to her emotional state via EEG sensor. Examining ways humans seek to understand themselves through science and personal narrative, both sculptures explore how engineering might be harnessed for emotional expression when freed from the confines of capitalist production.

I often utilize the techniques of the topic I am researching to express the ideas behind the work. Each project usually takes months to years to research and complete, and can result in multiple works. For instance, in 2016 I was researching CRISPR gene editing, and spent a year of research to engineer a human-scented flower. While the pursuit ultimately failed to produce the plant, the body of research resulted in two works. "Holding Back is Another Kind of Need" is a series of scent portraits I developed by designing a chemical protocol for extracting and fixing human smells into a perfume. "Laboratory of Longings" is a living installation in which the sweat of a couple is harvested to feed a field of carnivorous plants.  Both pieces are created through laboratory work learned from the initial research, and both contains aesthetic choices that aim to present the means of production transparently.

The purpose of my work is to create opportunities for the audience to think about how they choose to live through the current situation. I present the audience the beauty of the fragile and transitory qualities of impermanence. It makes them notice their invaluable time and ponder upon how to live in the moment. I utilize technology to appeal to the senses of various phenomena occurring in the given space and to amplify the audience’s experience.

My art training in Pakistan, New York, and Lebanon has activated a mapping of my cultural hybridity to negotiate tactics of sociality as an American born and raised, Pakistani-descent Muslim, woman of color.  My practice attempts to unpack the temporalities within South Asia as site, familial archival material, popular culture, and modern nation state narratives. The humor, lush visuality, and disorienting perspective within the writing, drawings, collages, and animations seek to make visible the outlines of cultural alienation and systematic violence.

i dont like artist statements that tell you their evalutation of the material (it is unsettling) 
My work explores the ways in which images are produced, disseminated, and consumed within the mass media, exposing the conditions from which they arise. My practice is rooted in the belief that to understand the language of media and technology is to understand the language of a prevailing power structure–one that is more often than not predominantly white and predominantly male. Creating strategies for dissent, I re-articulate mainstream visual material and technology in unsettling video, installation and new media works.

My current research focuses on creative practice derived from real data, particularly artistic data visualization and visual music, with a goal of communicating ideas rather than illustrating data. I believe the expressive power of this way of art making can be further explored, consequently provide alternate views on the original information. Typically produced in a generative approach working with computer programs, the visuals in my work range from inventive non-representational drawing to controlled constructions with highly studied shape, color and texture in virtual 3D space.

As a feminist artist and art educator, I see my background in critical studies and gender, as foundational  to the premise of my work, which takes seriously the responsibility of art and image-making. My initial interest in art began through recognizing the potential of video and performance to represent complicated subjectivity and to be a mechanism for strengthening feminist discourse. I am compelled to make art that privileges experimentation in form and content over traditional narrative structures, and rigid archetypes.

My trajectory as an artist is to give power to the characters, the viewer, and moreover the power to ideas. I am invested in celebrating art’s potential to represent radical personhood; presenting stories, characters, and ideas with nuanced meanings through experimentation with digital technology. 

The content and form of my work investigates the capacity to work against a capitalist model of art viewership and distribution. I believe that digital art has the potential to be accessed by a wide range of people, opening up the viewership to communities outside of narrow art viewership. Even through the process of distributing MT RUSH(2016) it occured to me that many people can be reached through just sending a digital file. Along with large institutions, I was able to send the digital file of the video to places that were not creative cultural meccas, engaging online viewership, moving away from serving a specific art demographic. 

I am currently researching User Interface Design as part of my project THE ALARM (2020, currently in-process) which I began to describe earlier in this application.  Part of my interest in User Interface Design is in recognizing how much art is affected by advances in prosumer technology and that User Interface theory has both influenced and has been influenced by digital and electronic arts (resources, equipment, timing, spacing, lighting, and the fetish of prosumer video equipment itself).

I am working with gender non-conforming people, who are playing User Interface Designers. This work is a response to both living and observing embrace and tension of queerness and digital interface: interface of gender, interface of sex, interface of information, and of course interface that can encourages community as well as alienation.

I use digital media as a critical tool to explore the ways dominant ideologies shape our understanding of the self and how health and wellbeing are intertwined in wider political, social and economic realms. Grounding my art practice in research, I layer montage, facts and humor to my own and found materials to address the issues around the human body as a cultural symptom, critiquing its objectification and commodification. My goal is to expose the excesses and distortions of contemporary life, while inviting further dialogue on how art can create alternative models and new regimes of desire.

In the submitted artworks I address subtle manipulation of human emotions and behavior under late capitalist forces, revealing personal and general state of discomfort, anxiety and a sense of surreal. I question how the contemporary lifestyle might have lasting ramifications for the mind; how psyche and sensibility become involved in the production process, and who decides what feelings are appropriate, and which ones are points of weakness needing to be eliminated in order to enhance efficiency and performance. The artworks provide a space where a wide range of feelings is genuinely lived through and completely acceptable.

The works exemplify my characteristic methodology where I combine extensive theoretical research with unexpected techniques, or the established ones are misused/repurposed in order to strengthen the conceptual framework of the piece. Every piece is a complex project that takes a long time to complete and involves multiple collaborations.

For the video “Well-being”, I used a “clone” tool in video editing software, normally used for retouching small ‘mistakes’. I based the whole imagery on that tool to transform a human face into a weird self-replicating creature, where portrait is no longer the site of identity, but a terrain equally inhabited by intimacy, strangeness and anxiety. The accompanying sound is a digital, impersonalized voice of the Google Translate, talking about the complexity of one’s feelings, influenced by capitalist demands. 

The multi-channel video and sound installation “Interval” was a site-specific project. It demanded a large production, renting a green screen film studio and hiring a stuntman to video the free fall, done by 15 volunteers. This footage was later composited in front of the images of buildings, and edited in a way to look as if bodies are falling up and down. The sound is made of multiple recordings of the street traffic.

I work in installation, performance, sculpture, video, painting and drawing, exploring identity construction, alienation, labor, history and the self. Through research and autobiographical experience, I build worlds, through which I examine stereotypes, prejudices and injustice. I am interested in the histories of migration and displacement, whilst enacting the bodies of the historically oppressed, in relation to the preconceived social order. Many of my projects deal with protest and freedom through failure, reclaiming the body through refusal, residing in the space of absurd grotesque. From research to sourcing of found and discarded materials, my work occupies an interdisciplinary territory of making.

I found my way into art-making as a queer, Black, introverted teen while designing custom Myspace layouts on the family computer in my father's living room. Today, I create kinetic digital self-portraits in an effort to exaggerate the identities often placed on me. These dense environments of video, stop-action photography, glitch, and jittery mouths explore the ways that we encode our history and use technology to craft compelling performances of self. My work emerges from an autobiographical impulse, and because intimacy is always at the heart of my exploration, I’m committed to implicating my body in the worlds I create.

I'm an experimental filmmaker and animator primarily interested in feminist handcrafted filmmaking, exploring the ways experimental and handcrafted animations make labor visible, aesthetically gesturing towards the work behind their production. I am invested in exploring the ways in which experimental animation forms and techniques can be utilized to address political stories of resistance. I'm also interested in the ways handcrafted animation is an accessible practice, inviting spectators to become creators, because of the extreme ease of tools employed. Additionally, I'm intrigued by the political possibilities of collage and its’ ability to call attention to the mediation of its’ production.

I make colorful collage films, experimental videos, and found footage essays that strive to visually explore histories and movements of resistance. For my experimental animation work, I construct paper cut-out collages which I animate on a multi-tiered system of glass panes, utilizing everyday objects and available materials. In addition to cut-out collage animation, I also work with 16mm found/ confiscated footage, 16mm clear leader, oil paint animation, hand-drawn rotoscoping, and any tangible and palpable animation form I can quite literally “get my hands on.” Recently, I have been exploring ways to incorporate my experimental animation techniques alongside live action film. I also have begun exploring digital animation practices in my own work, and the ways in which the work of “the hand” translates through these modes of production.

I have multidisciplinary practice including video, sound, and sculpture, often cross-pollinating medium within installations and performance. I have been working as an artist in New York City for the past ten years. I am currently focused on addressing the materiality and mythology of identity and displacement, bring together thoughts tangentially related to personal allegory and historical distant or relatively recent past. On a personal level, I create works that access my archetypal liminal states linking my Hispanic ancestry to themes of disembodiment, vivifying emptiness, contextualizing my intersections and upbringing in the landscape of abandoned industrial Detroit.

I believe the role of the digital media artist is to act as a mediator of technology on behalf of society, being technically literate while maintaining a critical outlook and social perspective. In my work, such as in Panopticon, An Instrument of Value and Transmotion, I attempt to see (and show) technology in separation from its intended function and context, drawing attention to the social and cultural value systems that brought it about, and subvert it to pose it at odds with its original purpose.

In Panopticon, for example, I exposed mass surveillance by making my audience privy to the view of the all seeing eye. In An Instrument of Value, I repurposed an automated carving machine to draw attention to the narrow focus of technological innovation, driven by capitalist values of production and consumption.  Finally, in Naturalism and Transmotion, I attempted to translate and convert human artistic work, exploring potential futures where creativity is yielded to machines.

I  work to reclaim ancestral technologies that have been systematically erased by drawing from multiple disciplines to unearth histories, and making space for decolonial futures by creating experimental multidisciplinary works that highlight a process of creation, negation, and assigning meaning and value. As an artist with professional experiences as a farmer and archivist, I bring an awareness of the double meaning of reclamation: to recover something lost; to bring under cultivation.

I used the aesthetics of a romanticized Caribbean natural landscape (sand, warm colors, leafy green fauna, gold), and materials that symbolize human-made processes (scans, Photoshop editing gestures, wood), reproduction (wallpaper, Text-to-Talk speech), measurement (botany), and visibility (mirror, transparency film), to emphasize the building or unraveling of a world. This place in the imaginary that feels natural is constructed just like our “natural” perceptions of the world are constructed by various epistemological systems.

I strongly believe that I am the most compelling artist working in virtual reality. Not because I have received multiple awards from the New York State Arts Council -- that is tiresome. Because I take risks and I am passionate about defining the language of VR as an art form. I have collaborated with Native Americans and Oaxacans in Mexico. I have opened galleries in Mexico City with aims to expand to Argentina soon. I converted a bus into a mobile virtual reality gallery and exhibited to 60,000+. My work explores the most pressing questions of human existence: what are we?

My work has evolved through technology, painting becoming the first step of a process. The canvas is created to become a database of imagery for future development with computer software. The work presents expression translated into information by digitalization. It is ephemeral, its variability  reflecting the instability of contemporary information. Dictated by process, the work is an example of how art exists in a post truth world, not as absolute, or as an original, but rather as a version of endless versions.

Situated between the physical and virtual, between natural and artificial and between traditional and new media, my work simultaneously synthesizing these dichotomies and, at times, transcends them, proving the dichotomies to be somewhat false. While there has been much attention paid to mixed or augmented reality, other forms of integrating, and thereby exploring, this current condition of having our sensorium split between multiple spheres and thereby extended and recombined have been less explored. My work explores these mediated realities where virtual attributes extend into the physical and physical space is copied into the virtual and the overlap of the two.

Inspired by traditional Chinese Gardens, the featured artworks explore our relationship to space, not only represented by four walls but also mindspace, and our ability to hold thoughts amidst the distractions of modern day life. Like the zigzags of a Chinese Garden, the project offers pathways towards an organic integration of our digital world with our embodied spaces in calming and energizing ways. Through playful interactions, viewers are immersed in natural scenes, community or both. Using sensors, coding, visual panels, projection, and sound, these installations offer visitors new ways of interacting with their environments.

My work explores the intersection of scientific research, cultural norms, and technological advancement. I like to challenge viewers to rethink the world around them, from the physical places they occupy, to their familial memories to their expectations of the future. My work transforms natural phenomena in mesmerizing, unexpected ways and showcases the power and influence of women and femininity. I use mediums that invite interaction like augmented-reality (AR) animations viewed on smartphones, or exhibits featuring touch sensitive electronics, where the work cannot be understood without participation. I believe art has a responsibility to question preconceived notions and create new possibilities.

My work is rooted in video yet spans performance, sound, text, sculpture, collage, and room-sized multimedia installations. I use found materials I collect at places like microbiology labs, spam folders, and industrial dumps. Reorganized according to science-fiction and anti-commercial aesthetics, these materials function to depict what a multi-species and non-binary world view might look like. With this intention, I bundle together my interests in perception, biology, queerness, the role of technology and intimacy, humor, and the importance of world-building to articulate more creative and less oppressive futures.

My practice is chameleonic in form. Using new media technology, I create fictional worlds through performance, video, installation and web content, creating a network between one project’s unique sites of distribution. In this sense, I mimic the franchise culture of popular fictional universes created by mass media, but continually challenge viewers to reflect upon their relationship to consumerism, and how it impacts their own identity.

My subject matter often involves reproductive labor, utopianism, and sexuality, and invokes a kind of nostalgia for radicalism in political movements — such as women’s liberation — that have been systematically tempered by neoliberal ideology.

My artistic interests lie in world-building and the construction of alternate realities. My drawings document an alien realm that is continually increasing in complexity; they are meshworks of cultural symbology, humanoid clones, messianic figures, and alien runes placed in architectural settings. My desire to make this world immersive has driven my interest in Virtual Reality. The unique experiential nature of VR allows for investigation of infinite space, altered states, and new physical perspectives. These themes have a strong resonance with my pre-existing practice. In 2014 I began collaborating with animator Simon Ward to create hypnotic transportive VR experiences for viewers.

As a toychestral electroacoustic composer-performer and sound designer, my practice encompasses inventing and composing with indeterminate and aleatoric techniques as a dismantling of my perfectionist conditioning, use of musical toys for their subversion of traditionally accepted instrumentation, and construction of pre-programmed electronic sequences and coding of live electronic processing to augment and expand singular sounds into ambient polyphony. I prioritize creating work that supports female-identifying, nonbinary, and genderqueer agency by providing a platform to reflect, emote, discuss, and find solidarity on issues of gender identity, cultural conditioning, mental health, and movement towards empowering personal micro-changes that undo damaging cultural norms.

Enlightenment is the main theme of my research. It is through a contemplative practice supplemented with biobehavioral research and neuroscience that I reflect on the understanding of the self, my identity and my sociopolitical surroundings to attempt to end/diminish suffering. I create immersive visual and auditory oasis where one can sense, reflect and be. By understanding of our own, we expand our comprehension of humanity; and while creating awareness of our systems, we recognize our desires and intentions. It is through awareness, that individuals are able to make informed choices as the first step to personal and social change.

Our practice includes working with custom hardware and software to create interactive, data driven woven light works using a range of materials, digital processes, and hand craft.

In the 2000’s we began weaving fiber optic thread on hand looms. This lead to the development of our current body of work (2010 to the present).

We live in a time of surveillance, privacy is all but vanished. We see data as a medium like paint and a surface. We are the brush and the tapestries are the canvas.

A string instrument that uses the walls of the space as its resonating chamber. The composition coded into the Arduino has a set of 24 short passages and a larger program that calls for them according to a random process initiated by the varying electromagnetic noise picked up by one of the microcontroller pins. It interacts with its environment and transforms random data in the space into a compositional strategy.

He is a musician and visual artist based in New York City. He creates sculpture, installation, video, and performance works that explore an interplay of sound and space. Translation, abstraction, and the visual representation of sound are the main focus of his creative practice. Masch strives to bring the audience into his work through processes that are participatory and interactive.

In my practice, I borrow from medical methodologies, in addition to incorporating clinical technologies such as otoscope to make videos, that study the relation between virtual and visceral. I examine ways of achieving resourcefulness, through care, mending and healing in the times of inadequacy. In other words, I try to create intimacy in a prescribed or clinical environment by drawing parallels between the human body and botany. These themes manifest themselves in different ways such as the reconstruction of a dismembered ear, fixing a broken cactus with surgical techniques, or trying to mend a broken mold of my mother’s back.

After many years as an experienced painter, I switched my primary artistic medium to computer generated video. Though specific in time and place, the videos are intended to convey the broader universal phenomena of solitude and contemplation. My intention is to subvert a medium, more normally used to create bombastic special effects and slick advertising, by creating quiet visual poems about memory and the experience of time.

The video poem is a creation of video and animation techniques with poetic dialogue narrated by the computerized voice of Siri. The animation is 2D, and created through archival found footage. The video originates from similar means but also holds excerpt from the footage I have shot myself. This mixture of different techniques gives birth to the narrative nature of the poems.

I most often create video-installations responding to the desperation of our hyper-capitalist reality. The visual narratives about labor and globalization, economy and product value shed light on paradoxes in human conditions and global systems. Often, I may implicate the body in exploring the relationship between subject and object.  I use familiar forms to create an immediate, relatable, visual impact. Through referencing the body, and creating visual analogies in connection to our world, I highlight the absurdity of our culture’s brand of social conditioning and perceptions. The slant humor is disarming, while also reflecting my ongoing analysis of societal norms.

My recent work addresses the role of efficiency and care in determining value. As Henry David Thoreau put it: “the price of anything is the amount of life you exchange for it.”  Throughout the 20th century, mechanized labor has displaced many forms of labor traditionally done by humans and animals. Through my sculpture, I interrogate symbols of power and modernization for example horses, trucks, motor homes, and domestic currency. In working with these images, I find the gaps in their façade and uncover the psychic loss when living things become reduced to decoration or motif.

As a Taiwanese artist and researcher, the experience of multiculturalism in the U.S. has shifted my practice from the pursuit of photorealism to appreciate the power of cultural critique and the poetic potential of the unknown. My past work has been most successful when it has communicated a critical message about my lived experience, I have developed alternative approaches to cross-cultural narrative and the expression of embodied experience, examining subjects such as the complex dynamics of physical intimacy in East Asia and the West. Currently I am developing a pedagogical and collaborative framework around emerging 3D media.

My multidisciplinary work is influenced by post-conceptualism and digital art, and has been defined relational, immersive, and participatory. 

My practice explores the effects new media has on our societies, investigating the relationships between technology, the objects we create, and our subjectivity. How our digital technologies are shaping our perceptual apparatuses, our desires, sexuality, and our relationship with nature?

At its core, my work is obsessed with what happened after we became naked, when we learned to domesticate the dog and the horse. When we first thought of a straight line and drew the first circle.

As an artist working in the digital realm, my job is to render the invisible, visible. And there is so much that is invisible. As we hurtle through the digital age, I believe we benefit greatly from new ways of seeing, conceiving, and imagining “the digital.” My practice aims not only to render the digital, visible, but to give it form and story. In offering new ways of seeing and thinking, I hope to add to the vocabulary we use to describe and navigate our latest frontier.

Inspired by issues of rabid consumption, immigration, hysteria, the paranormal and death, my recent artwork is a reflection of the uncertain and chaotic times we live in. The narrative of my practice typically drives the medium used, which sometimes includes painting and other times robots. The work is encapsulated in a humorous shell, functioning as a means of making the subjects approachable and as an opportunity to laugh at the absurdity of ourselves. This underlying satire parallels our culture’s preference to indulge in entertainment and fantasy, rather than the burning world all around us and the ultimate certainty of mortality.

She focuses on issues related to how we lead our lives personally, as individuals. And, to how our personal lives are variably connected to, and changed by, broader networks and communities within which we live and interact. Arnold is a video & scenic designer and inter-disciplinary artist working in theater, opera, music, dance, film & art installation. As a visual storyteller, she strives to integrate design and action and thrives on intense collaboration.

My work addresses transdisciplinary issues, through a technoscientific lens, with a political framework. As an artist I examine science, nature, and mobility as these relate to contemporary phenomena, including migration, radiation, hyperpresence and genetic mutations.

In order to create the most effective presentations, I refuse to settle into an established medium of expression, and instead, move between various media, including installations, publications, visualization of quantitative information and programmable media. Integrating technology as both subject and means of expression, I explore issues that are considered sensitive in the public discourse, unlocking them from the rigid political categories in which they reside.

My practice creates an argument for political/social/ecological evolution by modeling fantasies designed to ignite the political imagination. This is accomplished by overlapping electronic media, traditional media and sustainable technology with histories of resistance, utopian thought, and science fiction. Taking the form of experimental sculpture, video, and painting, my work fragments and interweaves biological, historical, and societal threads. I consider time and place: historical and architectural features of where a piece will be built or it will be exhibited and the physicality of my body in relationship to the structure. The results often look like crudely-rendered science fiction structures or crafts.

The production of objects has moved from using analog tools powered exclusively using the hands, to computer-generated output where automated machines perform functions void of the human. In terms of contemporary object making, computer aided technology has dominated how we think and make decisions. I explore how we can introduce the human hand in computer-controlled environments; in my current body of work this takes form by putting handmade brushes in a CNC machine to make spontaneous and gestural surfaces in ceramics. This methodology hybridizes craft, design, and art, where I can blend and utilize strengths of all industries.

The pieces built from textiles, canvas, tea towels, and other items represent an alternative to standard digital interfaces, and objects often associated with feminine crafts. Controllers and sensors are embedded into fabric, triggering unexpected polyphonic sounds such as bit-crushing, field recording, and synthesis created in Max MSP. Experimentation with feedback, crackling, and new soundscapes occur.  These works allow me, or the audience who remixes with it, to think about the interaction of mental imagery and abstract or concrete sound, and to research the ways imagination and expectation color the interpretation of music. What kind of new environment does this create?

Why do we think of the Internet as a cloud or tunnel? My work challenges these and other metaphors that develop around technologies. I use found materials such as wires, cosmetics, and more to create outlandish representations of these metaphors. 

My works addresses gender, sexuality, and intimacy in relation to technology in a way that uses humor, playfulness, and accessibility. My aim is to make research-based works that function at multiple levels: spectacle, beauty, and conceptual rigor. I draw audiences in with aesthetics that are excessive and lead them towards thinking more in-depth about the issues presented.

Working within the confluence of linguistic, social, and technical forms of language, my artwork aims to both explore and blur the coded spaces dividing understandings of fiction and non-fiction, public and private. Working across video, performance, and code, I intend to engender experiences that examine the fragile possibilities for transformative and subversive subjective formations that occur during translation and interaction between media forms, and languages. Focusing on the permeable and elastic nature of such transitions, my practice investigates the contradiction of linguistic and technological systems as sites of totalizing standardization as well as fertile grounds for subversion and creativity.

My work often start with me gathering digital manifestations of activities often associated with the feminine: talking about love, emotions, confessions, eavesdropping and gossiping. Many projects involve me creating custom computer programs that both drive the audiovisual components of the work while also interfacing with the internet to cull, organize and repurpose distinct, data streams, whether in the form of Twitter messages talking about personal history of sexual assaults, online diaries of teenagers, or information chronicling drone attacks. My work probes the sociopolitical and cultural dimensions of body and gaze surfacing through the story we inscribe into our digital milieux.

As a creative artist I've explored writing music for ensembles large and small, standard Western instruments and homemade or newly invented ones; microtonality with Partch and World music with Gamelan. My collaborations with theater, dance, film and technology help develop new genres of art. My recent work involves interactivity in performance and installations. My solos have a non-linear structure whose form is revealed in the composition's performance. For example using the Theremin as  proximity motion controller, one literally reaches into the antennae's 2 electromagnetic spheres to activate digital audio and visual samples, stored at specific velocity or pitch locations.

I believe technology can help us look into consciousness. My work is framed by philosophical posthumanism, which poses the human as a plural, fluid, and decentered being interacting in multiple spaces with machines, software, other species, and hybrid systems. My cybernetic installations explore hybrid spiritual systems and our subtle body (energetic body). Using microcontrollers, light, and electromagnetism as the raw materials for making my sculptures, I look for the poetic artifacts within the human-machine interaction. My intention is to raise awareness about how and when our thoughts and feelings may matter, as well as who and how they may impact.

My hybrid spiritual systems sense the energy within the space. These series of electronic sculptures are displayed like organic landscapes creating a metaphor of the forest— the unexplored realm full of the unknown. In my journey to descend to the feminine, I use the machines to establish a poetic dialogue with the other. The community plays a pivotal role in my guided “Meditation Sessions”, a performance where they are able to submerge with me into this journey. Their interaction creates an audiovisual symphony of color, movement, and sound. I document this feedback as fragments to build my hybrid memory.

My artistic practice examines ideas of perception, memory, and the spatialization of time using simple formal means and optical tricks. Through my work, I investigate distance and intimacy and the precarity of images on our screens and in our heads. I’m interested in ways of representing not simply memory in space, but the act of remembering and perceiving. My media material often comes from the personal and everyday – small details and insignificant moments that make up most of my time. I adhere to the notion that close observation of the mundane can reveal something profound.

All four submitted sculptures explore the act of looking and remembering via video contained within wooden constructions. “Telescope House” spatializes time and memory, giving viewers agency to navigate space by alternating between multiple focal planes, suggestive of the non-linear act of remembering. “Home Movies” juxtaposes the intimacy of home movie footage with the scientific distance of binoculars, conflating the precarity of images and memory.  “Home Movies,” “Vision Test,” and “Still Lifes” all foreground the act of viewing seemingly mundane and inconsequential images in a new context that plays with the idea of distance and intimacy.

In this quickly changing technological world, we constantly need to negotiate relations with memory, identity, physical body, society and more. Absorbed in an endless digital present, we live connected to networks that flatten the experience of time.  As extensions of the technologies we use, our tools change us and change the way we respond to the world.  These subtle, deep transformations are my main concerns.  My practice portrays a collection of failed attempts of the ingenious human spirit to control chaos, find a purpose immersed in an information overflow, decode undecipherable codes, recover from erroneous processes and failed visionary ideas.
Work Statement

My works are electronic photographic sculptures of animated photomontages. Things and objects around us become smart and intelligent, and their gaze is upon us.  In this smart and technological context, I choose to inject code in my images and give them life (anima) and make them smart.  A printed image points towards the past and makes us wonder what happened.  Moving images point towards the future and make one wonder what will happen next.  My animated images are trapped in an endless digital now, looping ad infinitum and expanding on the agony of the digital endless now.

What does it look like for resistance to become enacted in a cinematically real world of violence? Through sculptural video I investigate this question by shedding light on our global cultural obsession with the fantasy of violence in popular media produced by entertainment industries such as, first person shooter video games, superhero movies and sports entertainment. My hope is to find visual ways of disarming this violence. I am not interested in fetishizing acts of real violence, but instead in creating situations in which that violence is given space to be reflected on outside of real-life consequences.

As an artist, I examine who dominant technologies benefit and marginalize, and reconfigure these technologies as narrative devices and tools for critical analysis and social justice. My work explores the contextual and aesthetic aspects of data– treating data as cultural artifact instead of solely “neutral” statistics– to help build artistic interventions that aim to increase critical engagement and participation. By re-appropriating technologies that traditionally commodify and obfuscate public and private data, I strive to both highlight the political underpinnings of dominant narratives in society, while offering alternative epistemologies designed to be more inclusive and publicly legible.

This work centers on how bottom-up and poetic approaches to technology can help us to better understand socio-political institutions, built environments, social networks, and the human condition.  These interventions serve as critical cartographies and visualizations, reinfusing and imprinting systems with the histories of those aggregated, flattened, and rendered into data in typical mathematical models and quantitative visualizations. Through these projects, I aim to heighten our senses and our observational powers, so that we interpret existing conditions and data differently than we would otherwise. This work humanizes technology as a means of exposing and disrupting the networked machinery of social exclusion.

My art confronts self-imposed and external assumptions about identity in order to promote healing, particularly in relation to Blackness, gender, and queer sexuality. My practice presents alternate ways of connecting through a variety of media including animation, drawing, collage, sculpture, performance, and often incorporates humor. In performance, I have asked participants to tell me about their nemeses so that we could destroy it on paper. I search for strategies to address being an outsider and holding self-love. My art exudes strength in its honesty, craft, and visual metaphors.

I work in the media of video, installation and photography. My practice is primarily concerned with understanding and exposing tensions between the man-made and natural world as well as memory, Identity, and the notion of home.  

I am interested in creating liminal spaces where fantasy and reality become blurred. 

Mechanisms of classification, cataloguing and preservation are central preoccupations in my works. 

I'm fascinated with the domestication of nature, classifying mechanisms, and cataloging, responding to man's basic instinct to control the environment and to subdue the “wild” , a research that has drawn me to historical archives and museology.

I am an interdisciplinary artist primarily working in prints, drawing and videos The ideas in my works stem from a personal realm, but they speak out to different individuals and communities that undergo abrupt and suspended situations. While navigating among different narratives, my works negotiate a constant state of hovering and flux.

My projects are in dialogue through repetition and imply a notion of trap; in the aesthetic sense like the pattern of the fabric in prints as in a net, and in a conceptual level as looped videos. Through this process of repetition, meanings get distorted, lost and added.

We began collaborating in 2015. Our practice redefines the visual experience as a physical, experiential one, through the medium of immersive, interactive installation. Topically, we are influenced by the experiences of early twentieth century Bengali sailors who immigrated into the United States by passing as Black men, and use this as an allegory for relating contemporary non-white immigrant experiences, and looking critically at Americana, identity and related iconographic mythos. Our installations are typically site responsive constructions, and include sculpture, video, audio, painting, printmaking and photography within them.

I am an award winning, Brooklyn-based filmmaker and a creative director, originally from Tel-Aviv. I explore human connection using immersive Media. More specifically, I am centered around stories that make social impact and deserve innovative storytelling. 

As an expat, I’m interested in themes of estrangement and compassion. I find them relevant across different cultures and languages. 

In an era in which people reach for their cellphones before reaching out their hand, I hope my work raises questions regarding our responsibility towards our society, towards other human beings.

I was always fascinated by the electronic possibilities developed in last century's music, being an experimental musician and composer for 30 years. On one hand I can see new approaches on an almost daily basis, on the other hand I see very little interest in developing a language for electronic ensembles - performers like to work solo or in small formations. In my works, I try to develop a method for working with large ensembles to create a groundbreaking experience for composers & audiovisual performers, pushing forward the language of electronic ensembles, and inspire others to follow.

My academic and artistic work focuses on the relationships between gender dynamics and space. The implementation of media technologies, such as video and virtual reality in my artwork, allows me to approach critical questions regarding the use of these tools while speaking in terms of urbanism and feminism. The theoretical framework of feminist futures and cyberfeminism coupled with the political reality of my identity as a woman of color brings a unique angle of critique to the use of these technologies and the varying degrees of inclusivity and exclusivity in relation to its dissemination and the experience of the user.

I'm working with computational systems -- artworks that have autonomy over their own evolution. Progressing from experiments with context-free grammars and genetic algorithms, recent works center on signaling, feedback, and adaptation. Environments are made of many individual agents set in a field of elements. As agents pursue individual goals, field elements react. In this way, agents influence elements and elements in turn influence agents. The system overall moves towards properties, behaviors, or phase states that were in some way unpredictable at the start. These unforeseen events are considered instances of emergence. They are the most interesting aspect of the work.

As Nigerian born, New York based multi disciplinary electronic sound artist, saxophonist, and producer I hope to use this fellowship to create seven electronic sound scape under the genre I created called Yoruba Tech soul. This project will be presented as a live experimental sound production fusing traditional Nigerian Yoruba sounds, electronic, jazz, house, and classical music. The goal through this fellowship is to turn this traditional instrument into an electronic instrument utilizing sounds effects such as delays, reverbs, and sustain. During my sound art live exhibition I will use sound technology and the instrument called the talking drum

In an age of non-linearity, virtual reality and post-truth, digital art has a unique role. It is becoming an exceedingly relevant form, allowing an inherently reflexive and critical viewership. My creative process is driven by a need to stretch the boundaries of digital art, and to use radical aesthetic strategies in order to discuss political and existential issues that are pressing, and that can only be discussed through experimental film and video. My process is interdisciplinary and influenced by research-based practices, documentary filmmaking and video essays. The exhibition formats vary from gallery installations to experimental cinema and film festival venues. 

I create digital interventions that insert the invisible or missing into the visible medium of  photography. In the computer I alter photographs to conjure the unseen and unspoken—making visible desire, anxiety, and loss—shared narratives that have been exiled from our photo albums and Instagram feeds. In each series I try to answer a question: Can you see loss? When we pose with our friends and family in photographs what parts of ourselves are erased? How do we use photographs to remember, and what happens if we choose to forget?

Human has been made lots of digital devices and systems based on Digital technology then, they start communicating each other with I.O.T. and A.I. technologies. Even though we invent them, we do not know how they work like AlphaGo, a computer program that plays the board game Go based on machine learning algorithm and deep neural network technology. Most of us have been becoming just users, who do not have a controller and cannot see the whole picture of it. Therefore, I can say “The Singularity Is Now, not Near.”

This application represents my four most recent solo exhibitions.  For two of the exhibitions, my alter ego interrupted my opening receptions to finish installing the show live before an audience. For the exhibition titled Off Season, I lived and worked as my alter ego in a Hamptons gallery that was closed for the winter, while viewers could tune in 24/7 to watch the show unfold via live-streaming web-camera.  For all these exhibitions I produced additional artworks using highly experimental image transfer techniques.

The imagery I create aims away from the photograph — away from photorealism and the fixed frame towards what one sees in the mind’s eye.  Just as the strokes of a drawing or painting reflect the performance of their making (unlike a camera’s instant exposure), so too does my imagery unfold in time. The depth of the image has always beckoned me — in recent years I’ve embraced the 3D possibilities of cinema, stage projection, and VR. Even so, seamless illusion is not the goal of my work, for its viewers are led to look at their own looking.

I am a Brooklyn-based multimedia artist born and raised in Zhoushan Island in the East China Sea. My evening-length, hybridized works often mix consumer technology such as VR, GoPro and GPS, and fuse mediums including theater, dance, video, and performance art with DIY props and a sense of humor. The diverse, multi-generational casts of my projects range from bankers, municipal workers, sociologists, DJs, psychotherapists and scientists -- sometimes all in the same performance. Highlighting the shifting, participatory nature of viewership, mediated in real time by everyday use of technology, my practice reveals how experimentation is most fruitful when it escapes predetermination. My work addresses technology’s failure to capture the unstable human body.

The precise 3d laser scanner I use was never designed to capture the human form, which is always in flux. When confronted with breath and motion it breaks down, yielding fragmented results. I 3D print this damaged data, and the resulting sculptures suggest future memorials or post-apocalyptic artifacts, challenging claims of omnipotence made for new technologies, while teasing out the unintended, ghostly emotional resonance of the technological image.

I enjoy erecting work(s) with an opaque approach to issues typically seen as overt; with the goal to uproot conversations on topics that are sometimes difficult to discuss. Subjects such as perception, surveillance, structure, participation, and voyeurism are all common motifs in my body of work. Often my work interrogates and investigates who is viewing, why they are viewing, and what exactly are they viewing? My work takes up many forms, be it sculpture, sound, mixed-media, or moving image.  I aim to spark dialogue in critical thought; and perhaps, tell a familiar story with a medium much less familiar.

My practice tends to circumvent materiality and familiarity through a variety of recording and amplification techniques to investigate notions such as space, systems of identity, oppression, control, and surveillance. Driven by the probative nature of perception and the concept of conversation and social science, I seek to expand narrative structures through sonic stillness.

I’m a writer, producer, and performer, and my work primarily focuses on the inherent absurdity of relationships. Why we get in to them, who we choose, and what we do to sabotage ourselves when we’re in a good one: all topics worth exploring through the lenses of humor and satire. 

In addition, because of my theatre background (or maybe because of watching a lot of Fraggle Rock as a kid), I’m drawn to storytelling that’s grounded in realism but the world itself is heightened through fantasy or whimsy. I explore themes of love, happiness, desire, connection, loss, and grief.

My practice has long questioned how technoscientific tools of asymmetrical geopolitical powers can be re-inhabited by collective imagination. Can queer and decolonial politics guide an ethics of embodied technoscience? Because such technologies remain necessary for us to respond effectively to massive ecosystem change, better grasping how these information systems influence, build and shape our world may allow us to inhabit it differently. Remote-sensing arrays, machine visions, and global observation systems offer extended apparatuses of viewing, feeling, and operating in the world. To shift power paradigms, we must dwell in zones of power and redeploy its tools towards imaginative purposes.

We remember the photo taken in 1990 by Voyager1 as it left the solar system.  The “pale blue dot” as it is known, is Earth. Carl Sagan presented this image as evidence of our tiny scale in the universe. 
This sense of scale changes our perspective in fundamental ways. Astronauts call it the “overview effect”.

Once you come to terms with your scale what does that mean for art?  to make art that is not only for us here and now?  To make art on a cosmic timescale? We are small and impermanent, What is vast and permanent?  Mathematics, science.

This is in some senses a post-New Media approach, as the new media employed are not the focus of the work, but are used in the service of the underlying concepts.

I am a multi-disciplinary artist whose work is an exploration of lesbian voice, community and history in New York City from the early 1900s to the present day. My studio practices encompasses digital mapping and oral history interviewing as well as drawn, print-based, photographic and sculptural work. Born in New Brunswick, NJ, I received my MFA in Printmaking from Pratt Institute in 2017.

We move between Brooklyn and Cape Breton Island, in Nova Scotia, Canada. The relationship between these locations is important to our work, which rests on a practice of collective fiction-making and research, presented in the context of video installation encompassing 2- and 3-dimensional artworks. 

Through-lines in our work include the use of voice, song and body as vehicles to symbolically represent the morphing of singular being into shared communal experience.

Also important are documentary techniques, notably the interview — though the objectivity associated with the form is relinquished in favor of song-based emotion, poetics and a dialectical approach.

Since the mid 1990s my practice has been primarily screen-based and computationally driven, and accessed via the web. My main interests include game culture and technology, experimental writing, and creative coding. I have an academic background that includes studies in anthropology (BA), sociology (PhD), and computer arts (MFA). I often develop works that demand the creation of new platforms. Typically whatever tools I author are made freely available in the public domain, with the hope that others may use or misuse them in their own interest.

I work in a range of media including a series of mechanized light paintings and objects, live data-driven video, and works on paper. My most recent works are responses to interests in how information is hidden and revealed, edited and leaked, perceived, redacted, and reformed. They depict various impressions on place, instances, and are set to re-inform the way we think about data as we receive it today through both traditional and alternative methods. I incorporate ultraviolet light, mechanical motion, acoustics from objects, photography, and repetitive visuals to reference the interplay between physical vs. digitally-generated realities.

I am the creator of the augmented reality comic book series, “Priya’s Shakti” featuring India’s first female superhero who is a rape survivor. For creating the series, I was named by UN Women as a “gender equality champion.” My practices merge documentary filmmaking, comic books, augmented reality, and social activism. The comic books are based on my extensive interviews with survivors who often become the characters in the comics and advise us on it. By scanning the comic with an augmented reality APP, you can view animation, real-life stories, and other interactive elements pop-out of the pages.

Throughout my career, I have been striving to expand the understanding of media arts and technology, seeking a provocative synthesis of video, film, audio and sculptural objects to create interdisciplinary performances, multi-channel installations and interactive video scores for theater, dance and opera. 

Frequently engaging connections and confrontations between human beings, technology and the natural world, my work seeks a dialogue between the political, philosophical, ecological, virtual and physical realms. I have repeatedly coalesced digital media, computer arts, and performance to converge the miraculous and the mundane, searching for unexpected ways to explore mystery, beauty, chaos and the process of transformation.

My work is not a representation of what the world looks like. It is a response to the underlying abstraction in the urban environment. My images lead the viewer on a journey which triggers the memory of perception—the contradiction between what we see, know, and remember. 

I photograph moments of light and color which leap out at me from the street and combine images taken from different viewpoints into digital photomontages. They reflect the mind’s capacity to retain images and reconfigure them. The result is a dense composition which fluctuates between surface patterns and the illusion of deep space.

I was thinking the sense of visual and audio had strong connections. During the 1980s I painted contemporary egg tempera using medieval art materials like pigments. A personal computer improved rapidly. I felt more possibilities of computer art for my purpose and switched my artwork to digital. I created computer applications that converted pixel colors to musical notes. Technically same binary data can be other sensory formats file. Binary became the most fundamental art material for me like medieval artist's pigments. Also, the internet has been evolving as one of the best media to transmit digital artworks worldwide.

My artistic practice examines instantiations of power and practices of resistance in global contexts using a diverse variety of digital media and formal approaches. Drawing upon the fields of experimental documentary, critical fiction, and media art, each of my projects provides broad publics with opportunities to creatively, critically, and thoughtfully engage with urgent issues and complex histories. Through utilizing new media, digital video and photography, installation, social media, performance, writing, as well as online platforms, my work explores the conjunctions between theory and practice, emerging from long-lasting political commitments and engagements with a wide range of cultural and intellectual traditions.

Through a wide variety of media, I investigate history, transience, and remembrance. My pieces often give tangible form to memory, embodying that which is past. They consider attempts at preservation and commemoration and examine the state of absence that is intimately tied to memorials.  The works suggest the ephemerality of our lives and creations and how monuments and historical events diminish with time leaving behind artifacts and half-remembered memories.  Implicit in my pieces is an acknowledgement that reclaiming what is lost requires both fact and fiction, research and invention.

The metaphorical expression is always one of my method of art, simply because it carries the sharpened essence of my purposes through physical transformations that delivers not only the possibilities for multi-idiosyncrasy, but also humor and even ironic presentation that aims for seeing the "light" in ashes, "hopes" in boredom, "beauty" in mutation, "millennium" in seconds traveling or being part of the existence in this this schizophrenic dimension in our era. My mission as an artist is to solve a puzzle that cannot be touched, be spoken of, be seen, but to feel.

She is an Indian-American, cross-disciplinary artist, coder and educator interested in the poetics and politics of datasets. She works with both personal and institutional archives in order to explore the ways in which identities and histories are shaped by different ways of collecting, preserving and presenting data. Currently, she is focused on the relationship between archives and machine learning. She's exhibited at venues such as the Mission Cultural Center for Latino Arts in San Francisco, The Java Project in Brooklyn, Flux Factory in Queens and The Irregulars Art Fair in India. Aarati is also a part-time professor at Parsons.

Exploring landscape, nature, and the sky, Frieburghaus produces video, sound, print, and objects as a response to sensory experiences. He observes newly discovered places and natural phenomenon that demand attention and presence. While on location, he records video and audio and uses gathered media clips to investigate time, color, light, and sound. Digital techniques and memory are used to generate new perspectives that ultimately reveal relationships between sight and sound, producing new visual and aural landscapes. A reduction of color and shape, visually communicates the allure of natural forms and vast spaces while sound drives the motion and context.

My work addresses questions concerning the complex and changing world we inhabit and our “mixed reality,” living between physical and digital/virtual contexts – are we our everyday, familiar, material past, or our digital future, and is this apparent “mixed reality” of the moment to be embraced or resisted. Is the digital present the bells and whistles of an unchanged and familiar humanity, or does it define us and the future. This project is embodied in sculptural wall works, installations, and tabletop cityscapes, including video, inkjet-printed video stills, found materials, and paint on duralar.

My work spans 3D animation, installation, and interactive narrative video games. In my projects I want to question how digital technology affects social justice, labor, infrastructure, and civic history. 

Borrowing from experimental literature, avant-garde cinema, and early net art traditions, I remain skeptical of the tools I use. In this way, my work employs simulation software as a means to challenge the grand-narratives of technological progress. By subverting the context of video games and 3D animation software my aim is to counteract entertainment industries and the dominant narrow-sighted products they produce.

My work uses digital tools and formalist techniques to engage with quotidian materials -- sonic, technological, and cultural -- in order to explore the liminal space between the virtual and phenomenological worlds. By changing the material qualities or behaviors of familiar experiences and things, I give them room to reveal, alter or undermine their culturally determined meanings -- reworking the material aspect of the object in order to throw light on its cognitive content. Using interruption and flux, these works are environments in an endless state of change, exploring the process of consciousness in its constant state of collision with the world.

Our priority in making art is to deeply consider how images and objects function and how they bridge the personal, social, and political spheres of experience. We examine what counts as “new” and show how this determination has technological, environmental and social costs. We question how meaning is established and how cultural memories are formed. Our artwork ranges from sculpture and video installation to software, using technology to produce live effects and experiences.  In new work, we are employing blockchain technology, not to create a financial instrument, but rather to create community around the digital art object.

I create site specific sound and 3D animation installations that include sculptural elements. The works are composed with vibrations that form sonic spaces alongside sculptural projections. Using vibrations of motors attached to piano strings to arrange sound compositions within sculptural and projection mapped video and 3D animated space, the components of my site specific works continuously, symbiotically interconnect with architecture and each other. The constructed elements within my works are sound objects and spatial reconstructions. The installations reference the space they are installed, gesturing to how intangible spaces within us such as memory, knowledge and perception are controlled and regimented.

For the past decade I have centered my art practice on immersive cinematic experiences, primarily through animation and installation. My most recent work explores these concerns using tools and conventions from the video game industry. I create experiences that are intimate in the way only interactive media can be, depending as it does on human input to sustain itself. These artworks engage deeply with my ongoing investigations into modern day labyrinths; dense self-supporting architectural structures that emulate living organisms. These are places for lost, expendable people. In this work, the opposite of survival is not death – it is change.

I am a New York-based animator/filmmaker who makes things that move, loop, and sometimes hold and came of age on the northwest bank of the Rio Grande/Río Bravo. I'm currently at work on a forthcoming film about the border landscapes of El Paso and Ciudad Juárez and the river with two names that connect them.

While my background is in video art, TIME BEFORE MEMORY is my first story game and first interactive story. I’m interested in telling stories that provide a personal and immersive experience, and in narratives that can be told in a non-linear progression. My thematic interests include the organization of social space, human-animal dependencies, the history of human migrations, and the evolution of spirituality. I’m in pre-production for a second web-native piece that will be available on game platforms and as a mobile app. The current work is speculative fiction about the past; the upcoming work is about the near-future.

I seek out similar patterns of growth from organisms to societies, often comparing their families of form. My works’ points of departure are collections of natural history (e.g., crystals, organisms) or human history (e.g., anthropological museums of antiquities, data bases of inventions). 

Within this context the work encourages reflection on how “attention” is directed and misdirected. I integrate a variety of media, old and new, that places art creation within a dynamic, evolutionary trajectory. Painting reinforces the sense of bodily engagement and materiality, and digital technology enables a generative approach to creating form.

In my work I examine systems of natural phenomena and the aesthetics of information using a variety of forms, including film, video, animation, photography, collage, drawing and sound. My diverse practice engages with perceptions of time, memory, and visual experience through the lens of philosophical and scientific inquiry.

I aim to unravel the imaginary of our society and aesthetic by rendering objects, event, or myself in various documented performance which explore our conditioned humor through everyday life. I am interested in discerning how power invests itself in maintaining the perpetuated common sense through scripted spectacle centered upon the notion of alienation. Conceptual in nature my current work uses asian aesthetic in order to decolonize the contemporary art saturated with an homogenous typology.

I’m an artist and filmmaker. Taking an interdisciplinary approach to “moving image,” my short and feature length movies, multimedia installations, and photographs have shown internationally. Over the past few years, when not screening movies in cinemas, I create and exhibit experimental projects that inquire what movies are, and can be. Writing is very important to my work, and I often blend monologue and original scripts with documentary sources: discarded cameras; found footage and images; found text; dreams. Most of my work is produced within contained environments at low budgets, always defined by the limits of the technology in play.

My paintings make visible the relationships between physical reality and the mind. For several years, I have been visiting the homes of people affected by hoarding disorder and organizational OCD as part of my continued research into the physical manifestations of psychological states of mind. Analysis of my own compulsions for order, knowledge gained through interviews, and thousands of my research photographs have become integral parts of my process. By creating artworks based on these homes, I am not just painting images of people’s possessions, I am painting portraits of their minds.

My practice is multi-media using animation, painting, digital painting and collage. I seek to speak to the world around us through these different methods of making by drawing parallels between more analog, 'traditional' ways of image making with animation and digital media. I'm interested in bringing these two, often thought of as disparate, ways of making together in the viewers mind.

I investigate ways the virtual redefines the physical world. Using custom-made software and collected material from Internet, I create images, installations, and interactive works. These are product of research-based processes, and condense an abundance of information into unsuccessful data visualizations. I am fascinated by the politics imbedded in the algorithms we use daily, and in my work I highlight their design ramifications. I build interfaces that celebrate chaos, and experiences that use frustration as strategy. As potential cartographies of space between the online and offline worlds, my artworks evoke existential reflections to a world co-habited by humans and algorithms.

I am a video artist working mainly in the area of digital animation, motion capture performance, and moving-image based public art. Over the last several years, I have developed the use of digital characters, discursive texts, vocal performance, and queer-inflected satire across a body of work broadly titled 'Avatar Poetics'. This project is conceived as an absurdist exploration of the 'cyberpunk' aesthetics of dystopian, pre-internet science fiction, and a response to the rise of social media culture and the ongoing collapse of consensual reality in politics and society. This is also expressed across various journalistic and curatorial projects.

I am an Australian artist based in Brooklyn, New York. I am interested in collapsing spatial and psychological barriers between class,  noise, location, and body language by creating video and installations with a focus on sound, light, and mundane interior spaces. I use Non-Spaces to explore the socio-political significance that occurs within crowds and how globalism perpetuates anonymity and sterility.

I've been an artist all my life, having grown up in a musical home with two music teachers for parents. In my teen years I started writing literature, music and making visual art.  I have always been an integrative artist, working with as many media as possible, deepening the immersive experience. I believe the deepest works come from the dream state, and my desire as an artist is to reach the dream state in the conscious world, bridging disparate ideas in order to see the truth in all things.

With zoomorphic figures in unusual settings, my work explores human behavior, ambiguous relationships, and confusing emotional states.

Though the figures are based on the human form, they have various animal attributes such as octopus tentacles, hooves, and horns, but without sensory organs such as eyes or mouths. By recombining these mutations, the figures explore the differences between desire and unexpected limitations. 

Often, these figures are in elaborate enclosed rooms or completely minimal environments reflecting an imprecise emotional state based on longing and shortcomings, each with an uncertain narrative.

I work with sound and visual arts. My materials emerge from ontological investigations of background noise. The images in my work stem from processes and experimentations applied to both outmoded and current technological media that emulate situations that translate material source into abstractions.

My works embrace the objectification of the ordinary, repurposed technologies, extended techniques applied to time-based practice, and the nuances of perception in articulated spaces. Such creations embody contemporary life as a filtered experience placing emphasis in two notions that inform my work; debris from constant cultural bombardment and commodification, both considered to be sensory overload.

My recent artwork is a culmination of thirty years of exploration, experimentation and self-education in digital arts. I am grateful to be able to participate in an art form that has changed the face of art culture and creation, much like the invention of the paint tube did for artists in the early part of the nineteenth century. The digital realm allows me to wrestle with reoccurring and undulating visual questions and content in a manner that fits my process, interests and style of mark making.  My work blurs the lines and pushes the boundaries between traditional and cutting-edge techniques.

I believe making music is a privilege: an opportunity to change the world with every note. I strive to create art that touches and inspires people. Whether it’s sharing profits from my trumpet-kora duo with an NGO in Senegal; or turning my personal discovery of the West African griot culture of storytellers into a feature-length documentary; or uplifting a community by creating the first sound sculpture walk in New York City called “Sonic Gates” and creating a Community VR Dance and Music Performance celebrating culture and identity to overcome indigenous homelessness and historic trauma.

Technological progress often creates dislocation, unease and paranoia in its human beneficiaries, sometimes for very good reasons and other times not. The pace of these changes is accelerating as are the unintended side effects. As we become surrounded by devices that not only can see and sense, but soon, reason, we as a culture need to at least examine them thoroughly and through different lenses. In response to this accelerating technological evolution, our work, which focuses on the human body's physical and psychological frailties, has integrated advanced technologies as a way to explore some of these issues.

My work is conceptually and spiritually linked to virtual digital space. I treat the world of 3D software as an infinite, undiscovered frontier, residing in abstracted, ethereal, mental space. I populate that space with various digital "golem" characters whom I set forth as dumb, dangerous explorers intent on changing and corrupting their new world. As they morph and merge with the digital environments I create for them, it reflects on the violent, absurd, and tragic history of empire-building and manifest destiny and their current-day manifestations in bro-culture, toxic masculinity and nasty patriotism.

My work focuses on making public resources such as audiovisual collections, scientific datasets, and cultural objects more visible and accessible to the general public. I accomplish this through developing processes, software, and documentation for accessing these materials as well as exploring new ways of experiencing these materials when the technical and institutional barriers are removed.  I take a very public approach to this process, where I publicly document my creative and technical decisions as well as share my tools, software, and assets for others to copy, extend, and adapt.

My goal as an artist is to create work that challenges people’s assumptions of what they perceive or take for granted, specifically examining the mass usage of computers and networks. My goal is to shift our daily experience with networks into new forms of meaning and interaction. As technology gains ubiquity, networks will continue to proliferate but what will differentiate them will be their specific context and use.

As a person who moved between geographies (Ethiopia, U.S.A.) time and place are no longer singular for me. I am in a continuous dialogue negotiating “Here” and “There”, “Old” and “New”.

These fragmentations are reconciled through the story telling aspects of my work, as means to connects multiple realities. Through an imaginative relationship I strive to embrace the here and now, to connect with the ephemeral in the everyday.

While collaging my past with present experiences, I attempt to make a third entity that is in both the past and the present in which places and time are continuously shifting.

The installations analyze themes related to how reality television, social media, and video games have impacted mass culture. This user-participatory, inter-passive practice is derivative of video game culture which is held as one of the highest forms to critically approach the world we live in. There is agency for participants to become manipulated by an anonymous community of watchers via social media and other online platforms. The work examines how a player may control the actions of not a virtual figure, but a physical body. One person can process and execute a command given by another.

In 1980, by accident, I discovered a structured process which relies on a geometric configuration of the Roman Alphabet to create word-generated forms. The alphabetic configuration has a unique design based on the vowel/consonant distinction inherent in language. A simple process uses the configuration to generate a visualization of the patterning in the letter-sequencing of words. All my past work deals with the imagery and implications of this process. The exploration has taken form in a variety of media because of the wide range of implications relating to the nature of signs and the perception of meaning.